This is ready to go

JW 1.3.02


*** MSTART 401 315.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 401 RATIFIED 1982
Amendment of Amendment No. 315.
The legislature may hereafter, by general law, provide for the promotion of the production,
distribution, improvement, marketing, use and sale of soybeans. The legislature may provide for
the promotion of soybeans and soybean products by research, education, advertising and other
methods, and the legislature is further authorized to provide means and methods for the financing
of any such promotional activity by prescribing a procedure whereby producers of soybeans may
by referendum among such producers levy upon themselves and collect assessments, fees, or
charges upon the sale of soybeans for the financing of any such promotional program or activity
in cooperation with buyers, processors, dealers, and handlers of soybeans. The legislature may
make provisions for the nonpayment of assessments by soybean producers, and shall make
provisions for the refund of assessments to any soybean producer who does not desire to
participate in an assessment program. The legislature shall provide for the collection,
disbursement, distribution or expenditure of assessments or charges authorized hereunder and to
provide penalties for failure to make collection and distribution of assessments. The legislature
shall provide for the designation of a nonprofit association or organization for the promotion and
betterment of soybeans and soybean products to administer and carry out such promotional
program which shall include the conducting of elections or referendums among producers of
soybeans. The legislature may provide the manner by which such referendum is held, including
the procedure for application for approval to conduct the referendum, the appropriate action to be
taken by the state board of agriculture and industries on such application, the requirements and
eligibility of the association or organization which will conduct such referendum, the procedures
for voting and eligibility to vote in such referendum, the details of the conduct of such
referendum. The legislature shall further provide for the deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and
expenditure by the designated association of any funds received subject to the supervision and
control of the activities as authorized herein by the department of agriculture and industries and
the state board of agriculture and industries. The legislature shall further provide a procedure
whereby said association or organization is bonded, for the examination and auditing of said
association or organization, and for reasonably necessary rules and regulations to be adopted by
the state board of agriculture and industries to effectively carry out the intent and purposes herein
enumerated. Assessments, fees or other charges collected as authorized by any legislative act
adopted under authority hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the meaning of this
Constitution or any provision thereof. Any uniformity requirements of this Constitution shall be
satisfied by the application of the program upon soybeans.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 402 402.0 9099.0 AL 1901 1982 ***
AMENDMENT 402 RATIFIED 1982
Special Property Tax in Chilton County.
The county commission of Chilton county shall have the power to levy and collect a special
property tax, in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and
laws of Alabama, not exceeding two and one-half mills on each dollar's worth of taxable property
outside the corporate limits of any incorporated municipality in the county, as assessed for state
taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for fire,
medical and emergency services to areas outside the incorporated municipalities of the county.
The tax assessor of Chilton county shall assess the tax herein provided for, and the tax collector
of Chilton county shall collect the tax, in the same manner and method that other ad valorem
taxes are collected, and the funds shall be distributed to the Chilton county commission to be
distributed by said commission, in equal shares, to all of the rural fire departments in said county
that have and maintain an insurance services office of Alabama approved rating.
After the special tax shall have been levied for a period of twenty years from the date of
ratification of this amendment, it shall be discontinued unless a majority of qualified electors of
Chilton county, participating in an election called by the county commission, shall vote in favor
of its continuance. This amendment shall not become operative as to Chilton county unless the
same is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of Chilton county who vote thereon upon
its submission.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 403 403.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 403 RATIFIED 1982
Costs and Charges of Courts, and Compensation of Probate Judge of Henry County.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws applicable to or operative in
Henry county, fix, regulate, and alter the costs and charges of courts and fees, commissions,
allowances, and salaries, including the method and basis of compensation, to be charged or
received by the judge of probate of Henry county; and may place the judge of probate on a salary
and provide for the fees, commissions, allowances, and percentages collectible by such officer to
be paid into the treasury from which his salary is paid. This amendment shall not have been
adopted unless a majority of the qualified electors of Henry county who participate in the
election held on the adoption of this amendment vote in favor thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 404 404.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 404 RATIFIED 1982
School District Tax in Lauderdale County.
The Lauderdale county school district of Lauderdale county shall, subject to authorization at an
election in each local school tax district as hereinafter provided, have power to levy and collect a
special district tax, at a rate not exceeding ten mills on each dollar of the assessed valuation of
the taxable property in such district for public school purposes therein, which special tax shall be
in addition to all taxes now authorized or that may hereafter be authorized by the Constitution of
Alabama to be levied in such district; provided, that no tax shall be levied under this amendment
unless the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the local school tax district in which the tax is
proposed to be levied and shall have been authorized by a majority of the qualified electors
voting at the election at which the submission is made. Each election held under this amendment
shall be called and held, the ballots canvassed, the results declared, and the tax levied and
collected in the same manner as is now or may hereafter be provided by law in the case of school
district taxes authorized by Amendment No. 3 to the Constitution of Alabama, except that no
countywide or systemwide tax shall be required to be levied as a condition precedent to either the
authorization or levy of a local school district tax under this amendment. The holding of one
election shall not preclude a later election in the same district under the authority of this
amendment. The proceeds of any special district tax authorized by this amendment shall be
expended solely for capital outlay purposes in the public schools in the district in which the tax
shall be levied.
The county board of education of Lauderdale county may from time to time, without the
necessity of any election, change the boundaries of any local school tax district at any time
existing in the county, or consolidate any two or more school districts therein, if the taxes
authorized to be levied for public school purposes in all of the territory in such district after such
change of boundaries or consolidation is effected shall be at the same aggregate rate and for the
same duration of time; provided, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair or
permit the impairment of the obligation of any contract created with respect to any securities
theretofore issued with respect to any school district. The provisions of the preceding sentence
shall not be deemed to abridge any existing power conferred on the said county board of
education by any existing law, but shall be in addition thereto.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 405 405.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 405 RATIFIED 1982
Combination of Offices of Tax Assessor and Tax Collector in Lauderdale County.
The legislature may by local act authorize the county commission of Lauderdale county, by
resolution of such commission passed not later than April 1, 1984, to combine the offices of tax
assessor and tax collector in said county effective September 30, 1984.
If this amendment is passed by a majority of the qualified electors of the state and of said county
who vote thereon when it is submitted, then any law theretofore passed which combines the
offices of tax assessor and tax collector in said county shall become effective. If this amendment
is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of said county who vote thereon vote against
its approval, then such act or acts shall have no further force or effect.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 406 132.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 406 RATIFIED 1982
Repeal of Amendment No. 132.
Amendment No. 132 to the Constitution of 1901, relating to the abolishing of Macon county is
hereby repealed. The repeal of this amendment shall in no manner affect the other constitutional
authority of the legislature with respect to changing boundaries.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 407 218.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 407 RATIFIED 1982
Amendment of Amendment No. 218.
(a) In addition to any taxes now authorized, or that may be hereafter authorized, by the
Constitution and laws of Alabama, there is hereby levied a special school tax of fifty cents on
each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the school tax district of the city of
Huntsville in Madison county to be used solely for public school purposes; provided the levy of
said tax shall first have been approved by the qualified electors of the school district as
hereinafter provided.
(b) The proceeds of said tax shall be used exclusively for public school purposes of any nature
whatsoever in the school tax district of the city of Huntsville, Alabama.
(c) The provisions of this Amendment to the Constitution of 1901, amending Amendment No.
218, allowing the proceeds from the tax levied herein to be used for school purposes of
whatsoever nature within the district shall become effective upon the adoption of this
Constitutional Amendment; provided, however, that the provisions of this amendment shall not
become operative in the city of Huntsville unless approved by a majority of the qualified electors
of the school tax district of the said city who vote thereon at a referendum election held for such
purpose upon the call of the authorized official therein. Such election may be called no more
frequently than every two years; provided further, that if this amendment is approved by a
majority of the qualified electors of the school tax district of the city of Huntsville who vote
thereon upon its submission, such election shall constitute a referendum held for such purpose
and no further election need be called. Subsequent elections shall be called, held, conducted, paid
for, and governed otherwise in the manner provided for an election on the school district tax
authorized in Constitutional Amendment No. 3.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 408 408.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 408 RATIFIED 1982
Procedure for Filling Vacancies in Office of Judge of Circuit Court and Office of Judge of
District Court in Mobile County.
All vacancies in the office of judge of the circuit court and the office of judge of the district court
of Mobile county which shall occur subsequent to January 15, 1982, shall be filled in the manner
and for the time as herein provided.
The Mobile county judicial commission is hereby created for the purpose of nominating to the
governor persons for appointment to such a vacancy. The members of such commission shall be
(a) two persons who are members of the Alabama state bar, and (b) two persons who are not
members of the Alabama state bar, and (c) one judge of the circuit court of Mobile county.
All members of such commission must reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court of
Mobile county.
The two members of such commission who are required to be members of the Alabama state bar
shall be elected by the members of such bar who are regularly licensed and qualified to practice
law in this state and who reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court of Mobile county.
The executive committee of the Mobile county bar association or its successor body in such
capacity, is authorized and directed to make rules, not inconsistent with this amendment, for the
election of such members of such commission as are required to be members of the Alabama
state bar. Such executive committee shall certify in writing to the probate judge of Mobile county
the names of the persons elected as members of such commission by such members of such bar.
The senators and representatives in the Alabama legislature from Mobile county shall elect the
two members of such commission who are required not to be members of the Alabama state bar.
Such senators and representatives shall certify in writing to such probate judge the names of the
persons elected by them as such members.
The judges of the circuit court of Mobile county shall elect the member of such commission who
is required to be a judge of such circuit court. The judges of such circuit court shall certify in
writing to such probate judge the name of the circuit judge elected by such circuit judges as such
member.
The terms of office of all members of such commission shall be six years, except that the terms
of office of the two members of the state bar first elected shall be for one and two years
respectively, and of the two members first elected by the senators and representatives in the
Alabama legislature from Mobile county shall be for three and four years respectively, and the
term of the circuit judge elected by the circuit judges shall be for five years; the length of such
terms of office of the members of such commission being indicated by the respective electing
bodies. The terms of the initial members of such commission shall begin on January 16, 1982. A
vacancy in the office of a member of such commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as such member was originally chosen.
The probate judge of Mobile county shall record all such certificates of election and shall safely
and permanently keep the original certificates. Forthwith upon his receipt and recordation of
every such certificate, he shall send to the governor a certified copy of every such certificate.
No member of such commission shall be eligible to succeed himself as such member or for
nomination to the governor for appointment as judge of such circuit court or district court during
the term of office for which such member shall have been selected.
The members of such commission shall not receive any salary or other compensation for their
services as such members. No member of such commission other than the member required to be
a judge of the circuit court shall hold any public office, and no member of such commission shall
hold any official position in any political party.
If, subsequent to January 15, 1982, a vacancy occurs in the office of judge of the circuit court or
in the office of judge of the district court of Mobile county, such commission shall nominate to
the governor three persons having the qualifications for such office. Such nomination shall be
made only by the concurrence of a majority of the members of such commission. The governor
shall appoint to the office in which the vacancy exists one of the three persons so nominated for
such office. Any vacancy occurring in the office of judge of the circuit or district court of Mobile
county, which is required to be filled by appointment on nominations made by a judicial
commission, shall be made within ninety days from the date of the submission of such
nominations. In the event the governor fails to fill the vacancy from such nominations within
such period, the appointment shall be made by the chief justice of the supreme court of Alabama.
The appointee shall hold such office until the next general election for any state officer held at
least six months after the vacancy occurs and until his successor is elected and qualified; the
successor shall hold office for the unexpired term and until his successor is elected and qualified.
This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 409 409.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 409 RATIFIED 1982
Additional Ad Valorem Tax in City of Alabaster.
In the city of Alabaster in Shelby county, in addition to any and all other taxes heretofore levied,
the municipal governing body is authorized to levy an additional ad valorem tax on personal and
real property in an amount not to exceed 10 mills on each dollar of taxable property. Said tax
shall be designated for the city general fund. Such additional tax shall be retroactive to the tax
due as of October 1, 1973, and each year thereafter. The additional ad valorem tax imposed by
this Act shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as existing ad valorem taxes
are collected.
No vote by the electorate shall be necessary after the passage of this amendment to implement its
provisions.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 410 410.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 410 RATIFIED 1982
Indebtedness to Improve Roads and Bridges in Washington County.
Washington county may become indebted and may issue bonds for the construction or
improvement of public roads and bridges in said county in an amount not to exceed the debt
limits prescribed for counties by this Constitution. To pay said indebtedness and interest thereon,
Washington county may impose and collect an annual road paving fee on all motor vehicle
licenses issued in the county. The indebtedness, the bonds and the fee authorized hereby shall be
in addition to those authorized by the Constitution of Alabama prior to the adoption of this
amendment. But no such additional indebtedness shall be created, and no such additional bonds
shall be issued, and no such additional fee shall be levied, until each improvement or
construction proposed to be built thereby and its approximate location shall have been
determined upon and made public by the Washington county commission, and the proposed
increase of indebtedness or issue of bonds or fee therefor shall have been first authorized by a
majority vote by ballot of the qualified voters of Washington county voting upon such
proposition. Any local, special or general legislation enacted by the legislature to augment or
implement the provisions of this amendment need not be advertised as provided in Section 106
or any other provision of this Constitution.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 411 411.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 411 RATIFIED 1982
Salaries, Fees, etc., of County Officials Charged with Assessing and Collecting Ad Valorem
Taxes; Abolishment, Combination or Alteration of Offices of Tax Assessor, Tax Collector or
License Commissioner.

The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local law applicable to the various counties
of this state, establish the salaries, fees, commissions or allowances to be charged or received by
the tax assessors, tax collectors, license commissioners, revenue commissioners or other officials
charged with the assessing and collecting of ad valorem taxes in the various counties of this state,
including changing the method and basis of their compensation; and may place any or all of such
officials on a salary and further provide for disposition of the fees, commissions, allowances or
other compensation theretofore paid to such officials; and may provide that the salaries of such
officials may be paid from the ad valorem taxes assessed and collected by them on a pro rata
basis from the various funds receiving such ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that following
the effective date of any general law passed pursuant to this constitutional amendment, the
legislature may not thereafter either increase or decrease the salaries of such officials during any
term for which such officials have been elected or appointed, and in the case of such officials
who were converted from a fee basis to a salary basis of compensation, the legislature may not
decrease the salaries of such officials during any term for which such officials have been elected
or appointed or may be thereafter re-elected or re-appointed. The legislature may by local act
provide for the abolishment, combination or other alteration of the offices of tax assessor, tax
collector or license commissioner with approval of a majority of voters in the county affected.
In the event this amendment is approved and subsequently ratified by the qualified electors of
this state who vote thereon when it is submitted, then any law theretofore passed by the
legislature addressing the subject matter covered by this amendment shall become effective
according to the provisions of said law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 412 412.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 412 RATIFIED 1982
Costs and Charges of Courts in Calhoun County and Method of Disbursement Thereof.
The county governing body may from time to time, by resolution fix, alter and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Calhoun county, and the method of disbursement thereof, upon notice to
affected citizens not less than 60 days from the effective date. Provided, however, a majority of
the qualified electors of the county shall first give approval therefor in an election called by the
county governing body to determine this issue; provided further, however, that if a majority of
the qualified electors of Calhoun county who participate in the election held on the adoption of
this amendment vote in favor thereof, no further election need be held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 413 413.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 413 RATIFIED 1982
Operation of Bingo Games by Certain Nonprofit Organizations in Montgomery County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in Montgomery county, subject to
the provisions of any resolution or ordinance by the county governing body or the governing
bodies of the respective cities and towns, within their respective jurisdictions as provided by law
regulating such operation. The said governing bodies shall have the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations for the issuance of permits or licenses and for operation of bingo games, within
their respective jurisdictions; provided, however, that said governing bodies must insure
compliance pursuant to said law and the following provisions:

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 414 414.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 414 RATIFIED 1982
Judge of Probate of Bullock County; Compensation; Not to Serve on County Governing Body.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the fees,
commissions, percentages, allowances, and compensation, and the method or basis of fixing the
compensation to be charged or received by the judge of probate of Bullock county, and may put
such officer on a salary basis and provide that the fees, commissions, percentages, and
allowances payable to such officer according to law shall be paid into the county treasury. The
judge of probate of Bullock county shall not serve as the chairman, or as a member, of the county
governing body.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 415 415.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 415 RATIFIED 1982

Industrial Sites and Industrial Park Projects in Calhoun County and Municipalities Therein.
For the promotion of local economic and industrial development, Calhoun county and each
municipality situated in said county, shall, other provisions of law or this Constitution
notwithstanding, have, independently or in cooperation with one or more of such governmental
entities, full and continuing power (a) to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire land, or to utilize
land heretofore purchased or otherwise acquired, and to improve and develop such land for use
as industrial sites or industrial park projects, including, but not limited to, grading and the
construction of roads, drainage, sewers, sewage and waste disposal systems, parking areas and
utilities to serve said projects, (b) to lease, sell, grant, exchange or otherwise convey, on terms
approved by the governing body of such county or municipality, all or any part of any such
project to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, including any industrial development
board, other public corporation, or authority heretofore or hereafter created by the county or any
municipality therein, for the purpose of constructing or developing thereon, by such purchaser or
leasee, and equipping and operating, industrial, transportation, distribution, warehouse or
research facilities, and offices and other facilities auxiliary to the foregoing, and (c) to grant
public funds to such industrial development boards, public corporations or authorities. Nothing
herein shall authorize the county, or any municipality therein, to construct buildings for the
purpose of lease or sale.
In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither Calhoun county nor any municipality in
said county shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 93 or 94 of the Constitution of
Alabama, as amended, and the legislature shall have the power, by special or local law, to create,
or provide for the creation of, any public corporation, authority, board, agency, or other entity
empowered or intended to assist or aid in any way Calhoun county or any municipality therein in
carrying out the purposes of this amendment and such special or local law shall not be subject to
the provisions of Sections 104 and 106 of this Constitution, as amended. The provisions of this
amendment shall be self-executing and the powers granted hereby may be exercised as
alternative to, or cumulative with, and in no way restrictive of, powers otherwise granted by law
to such county, or to any municipality therein, or to any agency, board, or authority created
pursuant to the laws of this state.
No action may be taken under this amendment by the said county or any of the municipalities
therein until after the question of whether the county and the said municipalities shall have the
authority to take such action shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of the county at
an election called for that purpose by the governing body of the county and a majority of the said
qualified voters voting at the said election shall have voted in favor of the county and the said
municipalities having the authority to take such action; provided, that if a majority of the
qualified electors of the county participating in the election on the adoption of this amendment
shall vote for the adoption thereof, then the approval of this amendment expressed by said vote in
favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the taking of any and all action provided for in the
first sentence of this amendment and no additional election by the electors of the county shall
ever be required to authorize the taking of any such action. If the majority of the qualified
electors of the county participating in the election on the adoption of this amendment shall not
vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment, or if the majority of the qualified electors of the
county voting in any election called by the governing body under the provisions of this
amendment should not vote in favor of the county and the municipalities having the authority to
take such action at an election so called, the governing body of the county may from time to time
call other elections hereunder on the question of whether the county and the municipalities
therein shall be authorized to take such action, but not more than one such election shall be held
during any period of twelve consecutive months. Any such election called by the governing body
of the county shall be called, held, conducted and canvassed and may be contested in the manner
and within the time provided by the then existing general laws of Alabama pertaining to elections
on the issuance of bonds by counties. Any such election shall be conclusive on the question of
whether the county and the municipalities therein shall have the authority to take such action and
it will not thereafter be necessary for an election to be held in connection with each exercise by
either the county or the municipalities of the power and authority granted them by the provisions
of the first sentence of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 416 416.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 416 RATIFIED 1982
Costs and Charges of Courts in Clarke County.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Clarke county, and the method and disbursement thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 417 417.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 417 RATIFIED 1982
Abolition of Office of Constable in Fayette County.
The office of constable in Fayette county, Alabama, may be abolished by a vote of a majority of
the qualified electors of the county voting in a special election called by the county governing
body to determine this issue; provided, however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of
Fayette county who participate in the election held on the adoption of this amendment vote in
favor thereof, no further election need be held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 418 418.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 418 RATIFIED 1982
Costs and Charges of Court and Compensation of Judge of Probate of Franklin County.
The legislature may, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs and charges of
court and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, and salary, including the method or
basis of his compensation, to be charged or received by the judge of probate of Franklin county,
and may place the judge of probate on a salary and provide that the fees, commissions,
percentages, and allowances collected by the judge of probate shall be paid into the county
treasury from which his salary shall be paid. The provisions of this constitutional amendment
shall not be implemented in Franklin county until implementation is approved by a vote of a
majority of the qualified electors of Franklin county voting in an election called by the county
governing body to determine said issue; provided, however, that if a majority of the qualified
electors of Franklin county who participate in the election held on the adoption of this
amendment vote in favor thereof, no further election need be held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 419 419.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 419 RATIFIED 1982
Abolition of Office of Constable in Lamar County.
The office of constable in Lamar county, Alabama, may be abolished by a vote of a majority of
the qualified electors of the county voting in a special election called by the county governing
body to determine this issue; provided, however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of
Lamar county who participate in the election held on the adoption of this amendment vote in
favor thereof, no further election need be held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 420 420.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 420 RATIFIED 1982
Additional Ad Valorem Tax in Macon County for Education Purposes.
The legislature may authorize the levy and collection of a ten mill ad valorem tax in Macon
county, in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of
Alabama, on real and personal property that is subject to such tax under the laws of this state, for
public education purposes.
The tax authorized by this amendment shall not be levied in Macon county until it is approved by
a vote of the electorate of said county or unless a majority of the qualified electors of Macon
county who vote at the statewide election called for the submission of this amendment shall
approve it.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 421 421.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 421 RATIFIED 1982

Compensation of Judge of Probate of Pike County and Disposition of Charges, etc., Collectible
by Such Official.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws applicable to or operative in Pike
county, place the judge of probate on a salary and provide for the disposition of such charges,
costs, fees, commissions, allowances, and percentages collectible by such official.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 422 196.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 422 RATIFIED 1982
Repeal of Amendment 196.
Amendment No. 196 of the Constitution of 1901, relating to the costs and charges of courts and
compensation of certain officers in St. Clair county is hereby repealed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 423 423.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 423 RATIFIED 1982
Consolidation of Offices of Tax Assessor and Tax Collector of Winston County Into Office of
County Revenue Commissioner.
The legislature may from time to time, by general or local law, provide for the establishment of a
consolidated and unified system for the assessment and collection of taxes in Winston county
and for the consolidation of the offices of tax assessor and tax collector of such county into one
office to be known as the county revenue commissioner and for the abolition of the offices of tax
assessor and tax collector of such county.
Unless otherwise provided by law, the revenue commissioner of Winston county shall be charged
with the performance of any duty provided by law for the tax assessor and tax collector of
Winston county, and his compensation shall be fixed by law. Immediately upon the beginning of
the first term of office of revenue commissioner of Winston county, the offices of tax assessor
and tax collector shall be abolished.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 424 424.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 424 RATIFIED 1982

Costs and Charges of Courts in Winston County and Distribution of Revenues Therefrom.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general, special or local law, fix, regulate and alter the
costs and charges of any court in Winston county and the method or basis of distribution of any
revenues therefrom.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 425 425.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 425 RATIFIED 1982
Adoption of Proposed Constitutional Amendments Affecting Only One County.
Any proposed constitutional amendment which affects or applies to only one county shall be
adopted as a valid part of the constitution by a majority vote of the people of the county and in
any political subdivision thereof so affected, provided that such proposed amendment has first
been unanimously approved by at least a three-fifths vote of the elected members of each house
and unanimously approved by a local constitutional amendment commission composed of the
governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of state and speaker of the house of
representatives and notice of such election, together with the proposed amendment shall be given
by proclamation of the governor, which proclamation shall be published once a week for four
successive weeks next preceding the day appointed for the election in each newspaper qualified
to run legal notices in the county affected. The proposed local constitutional amendment shall
then be approved by a majority vote of the qualified electors of the county and in any political
subdivision thereof affected by such proposed amendment voting in a referendum election held
for the purpose of determining if such proposed amendment shall become adopted as a valid part
of the Constitution.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 426 006.21 006.0  0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 426 RATIFIED
Amendment to Amendment No. 328, Article VI, Section 6.09(d).

SECTION 6.21
Continuation of courts, district attorneys, clerks.

(a) All courts not herein authorized which are in existence at the time this article becomes
effective shall retain their powers for four years, unless sooner terminated by act of the
legislature.

(b) All judges of the supreme court, court of criminal appeals, court of civil appeals and circuit
courts shall retain their offices for the remainder of their respective terms.

(c) All justices of the supreme court in office when this article becomes effective shall be justices
of the supreme court. All judges of the court of criminal appeals shall be judges of the court of
criminal appeals. All judges of the court of civil appeals shall be judges of the court of civil
appeals. All circuit judges in office when this article becomes effective shall be judges of
the circuit courts. All city judges who are in office when this article becomes effective shall
continue to be judges of their respective courts. All present city courts shall continue to function
as provided by law for four years.

(d) The commission may submit a report to the legislature at any time within the first five
calendar days of any session. The recommendations of the commission shall become law upon
confirmation by a joint resolution or such recommendations may be altered by an act of the
legislature at the session to which the report is submitted. The compensation of a judge shall not
be diminished during his official term.

(e) In the event a city ceases to have a city or municipal court, all judges of any city court in this
state in cities which have more than one such judge at the time of approval of this constitutional
amendment by the legislature and on the date of the establishment of the district court, if
otherwise qualified under the provisions of this article, shall be commissioned judges of
the district court. Each such judge accepting commission as a district judge shall serve an initial
term lasting until the first Monday after the second Tuesday in January following the next general
election after he has completed three years in office as a district judge. At such election said
judicial office shall be filled for a full term of office beginning at the end of the term
for which such judge was commissioned.

(f) All district attorneys of any circuit of this state, who are qualified under the provisions of this
article, and who are holding office at the time of the approval of this constitutional amendment
by the electors of the state, shall retain their offices for the remainder of their respective terms.

(g) All clerks of the circuit court of this state, who are holding office at the time of the approval
of this constitutional amendment by the electors of the state, shall retain their offices for the
remainder of their respective terms.

(h) Except to the extent inconsistent with the provisions of this article, all provisions of law and
rules of court in force on the effective date of this article shall continue in effect until superseded
in the manner authorized by the Constitution.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 427 427.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 427 RATIFIED 1982
Alabama State House.
In the event the legislature determines it to be necessary or desirable that the Capitol be repaired,
renovated, restored, constructed or reconstructed, the legislature, by resolution, shall designate
and provide a suitable place for the meeting of the legislature and the transacting of business of
the legislative department. Such place shall be designated and known as the Alabama State
House.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 428 214.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 428 RATIFIED 1982
Amendment of Amendment No. 214.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the legislature may hereafter, by
general law, provide for the promotion of the production, distribution, marketing and use of
poultry and poultry products. The legislature may provide for the promotion of poultry and
poultry products and the poultry industry by research, education, advertising and other methods,
and the legislature is further authorized to provide means and methods for the financing of any
such promotional activity by prescribing a procedure whereby producers, owners or growers of
poultry may by referendum held among such producers, owners or growers of poultry in this state
levy upon themselves and collect assessments, fees, or charges upon the sale of poultry and
poultry products for the financing of any such promotional program or activity in cooperation
with processors, dealers, handlers and other buyers of poultry and poultry products. Provided, no
assessment levied hereunder shall exceed two and one-half cents (2 1/2 ›) per hen or other
domesticated fowl or any other classes of poultry sold by producers thereof. The legislature is
authorized to make provisions for nonpayment and for the refund of assessments levied upon
owners, producers or growers of poultry to any such person who does not desire to participate in
the promotional program. The legislature shall provide for the collection and distribution of
assessments or charges authorized hereunder and to provide penalties for failure to make such
collection and distribution of assessments. The legislature shall provide for the designation of a
nonprofit association or organization organized for the promotion and betterment of poultry and
poultry products in Alabama to administer and carry out such promotional program which shall
include conducting elections or referendum among producers, owners or growers of poultry. The
legislature shall further provide for the deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by the
designated association of any funds received subject to the supervision and control of the
activities authorized herein by the department of agriculture and industries and the state board of
agriculture and industries. Assessments, fees or other charges collected as authorized by any
legislative act adopted under authority hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the meaning
of this Constitution or any provision thereof. Any uniformity requirements of this Constitution
shall be satisfied by the application of the program upon poultry and poultry products.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 429 429.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 429 RATIFIED 1982
Promotion of Economic and Industrial Development in Certain Counties and Municipalities
Therein.
For the promotion of local economic and industrial development, the governing body of Bullock,
Coffee, Coosa, Dallas, Etowah, Geneva, Houston, Jefferson, Lawrence, Macon, Marengo,
Mobile, Morgan, Talladega, Madison, Shelby, and Tuscaloosa counties and of each municipality
situated in said counties, other provisions of law or this Constitution notwithstanding, shall each
have, independently or in cooperation with one or more of such governmental entities in such
counties, full and continuing power (a) to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire, land, or to utilize
land heretofore purchased or otherwise acquired, and to improve and develop such land for use
as industrial site, or industrial park, projects, including, but not limited to, grading and the
construction of roads, drainage, sewers, sewage and waste disposal systems, parking areas and
utilities to serve said projects, and (b) to lease, sell, grant, exchange, or otherwise convey, on
terms approved by the governing body of the county, or of municipality exercising such power,
all, or any part of, any such project to any person, firm or corporation, public or private,
including to any industrial development board or authority heretofore or hereafter created by any
such county or municipality therein, for the purpose of the constructing, or developing thereon,
by such purchaser or lessees, and the equipping and operating of, industrial, transportation,
distribution, warehouse or research facilities, and of office and other facilities auxiliary to the
foregoing. Nothing herein shall authorize the counties named, or any municipality there, to
construct residential or any other buildings for the purpose of lease or sale.
In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither the governing bodies of the counties
named hereinabove, nor of any municipality situated in said counties to which this amendment is
or becomes applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of sections 93 or 94 of the Constitution
of Alabama, as amended. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and the
powers granted hereby may be exercised as alternative to, or cumulative with, and in no way
restrictive of, powers otherwise granted by law to the governing body of such counties, or of any
municipality therein, or to any agency, board, or authority created or approved thereby pursuant
to this Constitution or the laws of this state.
The names and addresses of all parties involved in conveyances of land herein provided, and the
amount of any monies paid or received, shall be published in the newspaper in the county with
the largest circulation.
This amendment shall not be construed to grant any power of eminent domain in addition to that
which may be provided otherwise by statute heretofore or hereafter enacted by the legislature of
Alabama; nor shall this amendment be construed to affect the annexation statutes heretofore or
hereafter enacted by said legislature.
Furthermore, no county or municipality shall sell any real property acquired under the authority
hereof for a price less than its actual purchase and development cost of such property, unless:

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 430 430.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 430 RATIFIED 1982
Consolidation of Offices of Tax Assessor and Tax Collector in Blount County.
The legislature may from time to time, by general or local law, provide for the abolition of the
offices of tax assessor and tax collector of Blount county and create a completely new office in
such county and transfer to such office the duties of each of the said offices of tax assessor and
tax collector in such county; provided that the officer to fill the newly created office will be
compensated for the performance of the duties of said office by a salary fixed according to law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 431 431.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 431 RATIFIED 1982
Membership and Powers of Bullock County Development Authority.
As used in this amendment, "the authority" means the Bullock county development authority
authorized and established pursuant to Amendment 128 to this Constitution; "board" means the
governing body of the authority; "member" means a member of the board; "commission" means
the Bullock county commission; "jail and county buildings" means the Bullock county jail or
other facility for holding prisoners and shall include any building owned and construed
[constructed] by the county or a building authority and occupied by the county, or a state or
federal government agency or entity; "building authority" means the entity established or to be
established to finance and construct a jail and county buildings; and "industrial tax" means the
tax authorized and imposed under the authority of Amendment 128 of this Constitution.
The authority is hereby granted continuing and permanent status. The membership of the
authority is hereby fixed at seven (7). Each member shall serve a term of six (6) years and shall
not serve more than two consecutive terms; provided however, that a member shall continue to
serve until a successor is appointed. When a vacancy occurs or upon expiration of a term of a
member, the remaining members shall nominate three reputable citizens interested in county
development and present their names to the commission which by majority vote shall appoint
one of the nominees to the board. If the commission fails to appoint one of the original nominess
[nominees], the remaining members shall nominate three additional citizens in accordance with
the aforementioned procedure. If the commission fails to appoint one of the six nominees, then
the remaining members shall continue to submit nominees according to the aforementioned
procedure until the commission appoints a member.
All expenditures, bids and contrcts [contracts] respecting the industrial tax, except those made by
the building authority, shall be in the name and under the control of the authority; provided,
however, except as provided in the third sentence of this paragraph, no industrial tax funds shall
hereafter be expended without the approval of the commission. The authority may borrow money
and expend funds for educational and health purposes and to enhance or develop other resources
for the purpose of attracting industry to Bullock county. The authority may expend or appropriate
or pledge or contract to pay over to the building authority for as long as its original issue of
bonds or warrants is outstanding not more than one-half of the industrial tax revenues, subject to
all prior commitments thereof for debt service, debt retirement or other debt repayment, for the
purpose of constructing, financing or maintaining a jail or county buildings, or to assist the
building authority in doing so, or for educational purposes, provided that such expenditures shall
not impair the debts of the authority, and the industrial tax shall not be pledged to secure debts
incurred for construction or maintenance or any other purposes except those provided for in this
amendment or in Amendment 128 to this Constitution.
The rentals and obligations of the county under any lease entered into by the county with the
building authority shall not be charged against the county's constitutional debt limit, regardless of
the duration of the lease.
Act No. 81-838 of the 1981 Regular Session is hereby validated and declared to be fully effective
according to its scope and tenor. The tax authorized by said act or by Act No. 81-1028 of the
1981 Second Special Session and any other tax for a jail or county buildings authorized by any
act of the legislature in the 1981 or 1982 regular or special sessions shall not exceed one-half of
one percent and any such tax shall be imposed only until the original issue of bonds or warrants
for such construction is paid.
The tax authorized and permitted by sections 40-12-4 through 40-12-8 of the Code of Alabama
1975 for educational purposes is hereby fixed at one-half of one percent in Bullock county.
Provided, however, the commission may levy an additional one-half of one percent tax provided
by the aforementioned code section if the county board of education revenues fall below 1980-81
levels from all sources including funding provided by the authority. The industrial tax is hereby
declared to parallel the state sales and use taxes and such tax shall be collected by the Alabama
department of revenue.
Any changes in tax rates or tax collections required by this amendment shall be accomplished
within ninety days from the effective date of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 432 432.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 432 RATIFIED 1982
Fire Protection Districts in Etowah County.
The governing body of Etowah county is hereby authorized to establish and maintain fire
fighting districts within Etowah county. Said governing body is further authorized to enter into
agreements with volunteer fire departments within such county for fire protection and services.
The fire fighting districts herein authorized shall not include any corporate municipality of
Etowah county unless such municipality requests through resolution of its governing body to be
included in such fire fighting program. Any act heretofore enacted regarding said Etowah county
fire fighting districts is hereby ratified and confirmed insofar as it is consistent with this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 433 236.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 433 RATIFIED 1982
Repeal of Amendment No. 236.
Amendment No. 236 of the Constitution of 1901, relating to the compensation of certain officers
of Greene county, is hereby repealed.
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall not be implemented in Greene county until
implementation is approved by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors of Greene county
voting in an election called by the county governing body to determine said issue; provided,
however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of Greene county who participate in the
election held on the adoption of this amendment vote in favor thereof, no further election need be
held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 434 434.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 434 RATIFIED 1982
Costs and Charges of Courts in Wilcox County and Method of Distribution Thereof.
The legislature may from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate and alter
the costs and charges of courts in the county of Wilcox and the method of distribution thereof.
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall not be implemented in Wilcox county until
implementation is approved by a vote of a majority of the qualified electors of Wilcox county
voting in an election called by the county governing body to determine said issue; provided,
however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of Wilcox county who participate in the
election held on the adoption of this amendment vote in favor thereof, no further election need be
held.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 435 435.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 435 RATIFIED 1982
Annual License Taxes, Registration, etc., on Trucks, Trailers, etc., in Conecuh County.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the Conecuh county commission is hereby authorized
to establish, by validly enacted ordinance, the amount of all Conecuh county annual license taxes
and registration fees and ad valorem taxes on all trucks, truck-tractors, trailers and semitrailers
located within the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 436 436.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1982 ***

AMENDMENT 436 RATIFIED 1982
Fire Districts and Fire Prevention Services in Jackson County.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the establishment of fire districts within
Jackson county to provide fire fighting and prevention services; and may authorize the levy and
collection of certain rates, fees, charges or taxes for such services.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 437 437.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 437 RATIFIED 1984
Indebtedness for Daniel "Chappie" James Aerospace Memorial by Macon County.
Macon county is hereby authorized to incur indebtedness to the extent of not exceeding
$3,500,000 in aggregate principal amount, and to issue its bonds in evidence of the indebtedness
so incurred, for the purpose of obtaining funds in such amount and contributing that amount to
Tuskegee Institute to be used for the construction of "The Daniel 'Chappie' James Aerospace
Memorial." Such bonds may be issued only after the question of the issuance thereof shall have
been submitted to the qualified electors of said county at an election called for that purpose by
the governing body of said county and a majority of said qualified electors voting at said election
shall have voted in favor of the issuance of said bonds, which election shall be called, held,
conducted, and canvassed, and may be contested, in the manner and within the time provided by
the then existing laws of Alabama pertaining to elections on the issuance of bonds by counties;
provided however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of said county participating in the
election on the adoption of this amendment shall vote for the adoption thereof, then the approval
of this amendment expressed by the voters of said county in favor of its adoption shall of itself
authorize the issuance of the bonds, and in that event no additional election by the electors of
said county shall be required to authorize the issuance of said bonds. In the event the majority of
the qualified electors of said county participating in the election on the adoption of this
amendment should not vote in favor of the adoption thereof, or in the event the majority vote at
any election held in said county pursuant to the provisions of this amendment after its adoption is
not in favor of the issuance of the bonds proposed at said election, the governing body of said
county may from time to time call other elections hereunder on the issuance of said bonds, but
not more than one such election shall be held during any period of twelve consecutive months.
The power to become indebted and to issue bonds in evidence of such indebtedness shall be in
addition to all other powers which the said county may have under the Constitution and laws of
Alabama, and any bonds issued pursuant to this amendment shall not be chargeable against the
amount of indebtedness which said county may incur under the Constitution and laws of
Alabama in effect prior to the adoption of this amendment. All bonds issued under this
amendment shall be general obligations of the county secured by an irrevocable pledge of its full
faith and credit, may (any provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state to the contrary
notwithstanding) be additionally secured by a special and irrevocable pledge of a sufficient
amount of the proceeds from the special 1/4 of 1% ad valorem tax authorized by Section 215 of
the Constitution of Alabama, as amended, to be levied and collected by the county, shall be
issued in accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of the general laws of Alabama
existing at the time of the sale of said bonds respecting the maturities, sale, execution and
redemption of bonds by counties.
The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 438 438.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 438 RATIFIED 1984
Indebtedness for Daniel "Chappie" James Aerospace by Memorial City of Tuskegee.
The city of Tuskegee in Macon county is hereby authorized to incur indebtedness to the extent of
not exceeding $3,500,000 in aggregate principal amount, and to issue its bonds in evidence of the
indebtedness so incurred, for the purpose of obtaining funds in such amount and contributing that
amount to Tuskegee Institute to be used for the construction of "The Daniel 'Chappie' James
Aerospace Memorial." Such bonds may be issued only after the question of the issuance thereof
shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of said municipality at an election called for
that purpose by the governing body of said municipality and a majority of said qualified electors
voting at said election shall have voted in favor of the issuance of said bonds, which election
shall be called, held, conducted, and canvassed, and may be contested, in the manner and within
the time provided by the then existing laws of Alabama pertaining to elections on the issuance of
bonds by municipalities; provided, however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of said
municipality participating in the election on the adoption of this amendment shall vote for the
adoption thereof, then the approval of this amendment expressed by the voters of said
municipality in favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the issuance of the bonds, and in that
event no additional election by the electors of said municipality shall be required to authorize the
issuance of said bonds. In the event the majority of the qualified electors of said municipality
participating in the election on the adoption of this amendment should not vote in favor of the
adoption thereof, or in the event the majority vote at any election held in said municipality
pursuant to the provisions of this amendment after its adoption is not in favor of the issuance of
the bonds proposed at said election, the governing body of said municipality may from time to
time call other elections hereunder on the issuance of said bonds, but not more than one such
election shall be held during any period of twelve consecutive months. The power to become
indebted and to issue bonds in evidence of such indebtedness shall be in addition to all other
powers which the said municipality may have under the Constitution and laws of Alabama, and
any bonds issued pursuant to this amendment shall not be chargeable against the amount of
indebtedness which said municipality may incur under the Constitution and laws of Alabama in
effect prior to the adoption of this amendment. All bonds issued under this amendment shall be
general obligations of the municipality secured by an irrevocable pledge of its full faith and
credit, may (any provisions of the Constitution and laws of this state to the contrary
notwithstanding) be additionally secured by a special and irrevocable pledge of a sufficient
amount of the proceeds from the 1 1/4 % ad valorem tax authorized by Amendment 56 to the
Constitution of Alabama, to be levied and collected by the municipality, shall be issued in
accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of the general laws of Alabama existing
at the time of the sale of said bonds respecting the maturities, sale, execution and redemption of
bonds by municipalities.
The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 439 439.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 439 RATIFIED 1984
Forest Fire Protection in Marshall County.
The legislature may prescribe by local law for Marshall county for forest fire protection in the
county and may authorize the county governing body to further promote and provide for tax on
acreage, on a basis other than ad valorem, therefore. The legislature may provide for the manner
for levying and collecting such assessments and the distribution thereof. The legislature may
further provide for the administration of such forest fire protection promotion.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 440 440.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 440 RATIFIED 1984
Operation of Bingo Games in Mobile County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in Mobile county, subject to the
provisions of any resolution or ordinance by the county governing body or the governing bodies
of the respective cities and towns, within their respective jurisdictions as provided by law
regulating such operation. The said governing bodies shall have the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations for the issuance of permits or licenses and for operation of bingo games, within
their respective jurisdictions; provided, however, that said governing bodies must ensure
compliance pursuant to said law and the following provisions:
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall
have the right and power by general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the general purposes and objectives herein set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 441 441.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 441 RATIFIED 1984
Comprehensive Health Insurance Plan for Retired Mobile County Employees.
The Mobile county commission may, from time to time by resolution duly adopted and spread
upon its minutes, provide for a comprehensive health insurance plan for retired county
employees. If such plan is so adopted, the Mobile county commission shall determine the extent
of coverage of such plan and shall prescribe rules and regulations governing participation in such
plan.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 442 442.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 442 RATIFIED 1984
Privilege, License, etc., Taxes and Securities for Funding County Facilities in Randolph County.
(A) As used in this amendment, the following terms shall be given the following respective
meanings:
(B) The county is hereby authorized and directed, within 60 days after the proclamation of the
ratification of this amendment, to levy and collect, or provide for the collection of special
privilege, license and excise taxes on those engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property and conducting places of amusement in the county at the rate of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) of the gross receipts of the businesses made subject to the special sales tax, which tax
shall, to the fullest extent possible, parallel the sales and use taxes levied by the state. All
revenues derived by the county from the levy of the special sales tax, less the cost of collection
of such revenues not to exceed 5% thereof to be paid to the department of revenue, shall be paid
into the county facilities building fund. The county shall discontinue the levy of the special sales
tax when all of the securities issued hereunder shall have been paid in full, or when the county
shall have expended the sum of $1,500,000 out of the county facilities building fund to pay costs
of county facilities, whichever shall last occur.
(C) The county is hereby authorized and directed (subject to prior pledges and agreements, if
any) to pay, out of taxes collected each year, beginning with taxes collected with respect to the
tax year that began October 1, 1982, one-half of the tax receipts derived from the levy of the
special ad valorem tax into the county facilities building fund. The county shall discontinue
paying such tax receipts into the county facilities building fund when all of the securities issued
hereunder have been paid in full, or when the county shall have expended the sum of $1,500,000
out of the county facilities building fund to pay costs of county facilities, whichever shall last
occur.
(D) The county is hereby authorized and directed (subject to prior pledges and agreements, if
any) to pay four-tenths of the tax receipts derived by the county from the levy of the existing ad
valorem tax into the county facilities building fund. The county shall discontinue paying such tax
receipts into the county facilities building fund when all of the securities issued hereunder have
been paid in full, or when the county shall have expended the sum of $1,500,000 out of the
county facilities building fund to pay costs of county facilities, whichever shall last occur.
(E) The county is hereby authorized and directed to establish the county facilities building fund
for the purpose of receiving the moneys required to be paid therein by the provisions hereof.
Funds on deposit in the county facilities building fund shall be used to pay the costs of acquiring,
providing, constructing and equipping new county facilities, renovating, reconstructing,
improving, enlarging or equipping any existing county facilities or any combination thereof, up
to an amount not exceeding $1,500,000, and to pay principal of and interest and premium, if any,
on securities issued hereunder to finance county facilities.
(F) The county is hereby authorized to sell and issue from time to time its securities, not
exceeding $1,500,000 in aggregate principal amount, for the purpose of acquiring, providing,
constructing and equipping new county facilities, renovating, reconstructing, improving,
enlarging or equipping any existing county facilities or any combination thereof and to pledge for
payment of the securities the portions of the special taxes required to be paid into the county
facilities building fund.
For the purpose of refunding any securities, including refunding securities issued under the
provisions of this amendment, whether the refunding shall occur before, at or after the maturity
of the securities refunded and for the purpose of paying all premiums and expenses of the
refunding (including attorneys' fees, costs of printing the refunding securities, fiscal agents' fees,
and accountants' fees), the county is hereby authorized to sell and issue from time to time
refunding securities in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding the sum of (a) the
outstanding principal amount of the securities to be refunded, (b) the interest (accrued or to
accrue) to the respective maturities of the securities to be refunded, or if the securities to be
refunded are to be called for redemption, either on the earliest date on which under their terms
they may be redeemed or some later date or dates, the interest (accrued or to accrue) on the
securities to be refunded to the date or dates on which they are to be called for redemption, (c)
the amount of any redemption premium required, by the terms of the securities, to be paid as a
condition to their redemption prior to their respective maturities, and (d) the amount of any
expenses (actual or estimated) of such refunding.
The securities issued hereunder may but need not be general obligations of the county, but shall
be secured by the portions of the special taxes pledged for their payment in the proceedings of
the county whereunder the securities are authorized to be issued and required to be paid into the
county facilities building fund.
All securities issued under this amendment may be in such form and denominations and of such
tenor and maturities, may bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such time or times, not
exceeding thirty (30) years from their date, may be sold at public or private sale and may contain
such provisions not inconsistent with this amendment as shall be provided in the proceedings of
the governing body of the county wherein such securities are authorized to be issued. The power
to levy the special sales tax, to pay as required herein the portions of the special ad valorem tax
and the existing ad valorem tax into the county facilities building fund and the power to issue the
securities shall be in addition to all other powers which the county may have under this
Constitution and the laws of Alabama. The indebtedness evidenced by the securities issued under
this amendment shall be in addition to and shall not be charged against the limitation on the
indebtedness of the county provided for in section 224 of the Constitution.
(G) It is the intention hereof that the governing body of the county shall (a) levy the special sales
tax, and (b) pay one-half of the revenues from the special ad valorem tax and four-tenths of the
revenues from the existing ad valorem tax (subject only to prior pledges of either thereof) as shall
together be sufficient to provide funds to pay costs of county facilities herein provided for, either
directly or through payment of the principal of and interest (and premium, if any) on the
securities authorized to be issued hereunder, all to the end that adequate county facilities will be
available in the county. Proceeds of the special taxes that are not needed in any fiscal year to pay
principal of and interest on securities issued hereunder or to refund securities shall be used to pay
costs of constructing and maintaining the county facilities herein provided for, or to purchase and
retire securities or call securities for redemption prior to the maturity thereof.
(H) The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or any
other action by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of the securities
hereunder or to the levy of the special taxes or the use of the proceeds of the special taxes as
provided herein; provided, however, that the provisions of this amendment shall not become
operative unless approved by a majority of the qualified electors of Randolph county who vote
thereon at a referendum election held for such purpose upon the call of the Randolph county
commission, and provided further, that if this amendment is approved by the qualified electors of
Randolph county who vote thereon upon its submission, such election shall constitute a
referendum held for such purpose and no further election need be called.
(I) It is hereby specifically declared that this amendment is not being proposed pursuant to the
provisions of that certain amendment to the Constitution (known as amendment no. 425) that was
proposed by Act No. 82-330 adopted at the 1982 Regular Session of the legislature of Alabama,
and provisions of the said amendment 425 are hereby declared to be inapplicable.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 443 443.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 443 RATIFIED 19844
Conveyance of State Docks Property to Local Authorities.
The state of Alabama, through the Alabama state docks department, is authorized to convey,
without consideration, title to its real property, equipment and facilities located in Lauderdale
county, Alabama, and known as the Alabama state docks to the Florence-Lauderdale county port
authority, a public corporation, but subject to existing leases and other contractual agreements
now in effect. Any laws or parts of laws or any provisions of the Constitution of 1901, as
amended, which are in conflict with this amendment are hereby revised, superseded and repealed
to the extent they are in conflict with this amendment.
The state of Alabama, through the Alabama state docks department, is authorized to convey, with
consideration at a price to be established by the director of the Alabama state docks department
and his appraisers, title to its real property, equipment and facilities located in Morgan county,
Alabama, and known as the Alabama state docks to the Decatur-Morgan county port authority, a
public corporation, and in Walker county, Alabama, known as the state docks in Cordova in
Walker county to the Walker county commission, but subject to existing leases and other
contractual agreements now in effect. Any laws or parts of laws or any provisions of the
Constitution of 1901, as amended, which are in conflict with this amendment are hereby revised,
superseded and repealed to the extent they are in conflict with this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 444 444.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 444 RATIFIED 1984
Randolph County Facilities Building Fund.
(A) As used in this amendment, the following terms shall be given the following respective
meanings:
(B) The county is hereby authorized and directed (subject to prior pledges and agreements, if
any) to pay, out of taxes collected each year, beginning with taxes collected with respect to the
tax year that began October 1, 1982, one-half of the tax receipts derived from the levy of the
special ad valorem tax into the county facilities building fund. The county shall discontinue
paying such tax receipts into the county facilities building fund when all of the securities issued
hereunder and any related securities issued by the county have been paid in full, or when the
county shall have expended the sum of $1,500,000 out of the county facilities building fund to
pay costs of county facilities, whichever shall last occur.
(C) The county is hereby authorized and directed (subject to prior pledges and agreements, if
any) to pay, out of taxes collected each year, beginning with taxes collected with respect to the
tax year that began October 1, 1982, four-tenths of the tax receipts derived by the county from
the levy of the existing ad valorem tax into the county facilities building fund. The county shall
discontinue paying such tax receipts into the county facilities building fund when all of the
securities issued hereunder and any related securities issued by the county have been paid in full,
or when the county shall have expended the sum of $1,500,000 out of the county facilities
building fund to pay costs of county facilities, whichever shall last occur.
(D) The county is hereby authorized and directed to establish the county facilities building fund
for the purpose of receiving the moneys required to be paid therein by the provisions hereof and
any other tax receipts or other moneys of the county that the county may determine to pay
therein. Funds on deposit in the county facilities building fund shall be used to pay costs of
county facilities, up to an amount not exceeding $1,500,000, and to pay principal of and interest
and premium, if any, on (1) securities issued hereunder to finance costs of county facilities and
(2) related securities issued to finance costs of county facilities.
(E) The county is hereby authorized to sell and issue from time to time its securities, not
exceeding $1,500,000 in aggregate principal amount, for the purpose of financing costs of county
facilities and to pledge for payment of the securities the portions of the special taxes required to
be paid into the county facilities building fund.
For the purpose of refunding any securities, including refunding securities issued under the
provisions of this amendment, whether the refunding shall occur before, at or after the maturity
of the securities refunded and for the purpose of paying all premiums and expenses of the
refunding (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees, costs of printing the refunding
securities, fiscal agents' fees, and accountants' fees), the county is hereby authorized to sell and
issue from time to time refunding securities in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding the
sum of (a) the outstanding principal amount of the securities to be refunded, (b) the interest
(accrued or to accrue) to the respective maturities of the securities to be refunded, or if the
securities to be refunded are to be called for redemption, either on the earliest date on which
under their terms they may be redeemed or some later date or dates, the interest (accrued or to
accrue) on the securities to be refunded to the date or dates on which they are to be called for
redemption, (c) the amount of any redemption premium required, by the terms of the securities,
to be paid as a condition to their redemption prior to their respective maturities, and (d) the
amount of any expenses (actual or estimated) of such refunding.
The securities issued hereunder may but need not be general obligations of the county, but shall
be secured by the portions of the special taxes pledged for their payment in the proceedings of
the county whereunder the securities are authorized to be issued and required to be paid into the
county facilities building fund.
All securities issued under this amendment may be in such form and denominations and of such
tenor and maturities, may bear interest at such rate or rates, payable at such time or times, not
exceeding 30 years from their date, may be sold at public or private sale and may contain such
provisions not inconsistent with this amendment as shall be provided in the proceedings of the
governing body of the county whereunder such securities are authorized to be issued. The power
to pay, as required herein, the portions of the special ad valorem tax and the existing ad valorem
tax into the county facilities building fund and the power to issue the securities shall be in
addition to all other powers which the county may have under this Constitution and the laws of
Alabama. The indebtedness evidenced by the securities issued under this amendment shall be in
addition to all other indebtedness authorized to be incurred by the county and shall not be
charged against the limitation on the indebtedness of the county provided for in Section 224 of
the Constitution.
(F) The county is hereby authorized to pledge for payment of principal of and interest (and
premium, if any) on related securities the portions of the special taxes required to be paid into the
county facilities building fund.
(G) It is the intention hereof that the governing body of the county shall pay one-half of the
revenues from the special ad valorem tax and four-tenths of the revenues from the existing ad
valorem tax (subject only to prior pledges of and agreements pertaining to either thereof) as shall,
together with any other moneys paid into the county facilities building fund, be sufficient to
provide funds to make available county facilities for the county, either directly through payment
of costs of county facilities or through payment of the principal of and interest (and premium, if
any) on the securities authorized to be issued hereunder and on any related securities that may be
issued by the county for the purpose of paying costs of county facilities, all to the end that
adequate county facilities will be available in the county. Proceeds of the special taxes paid into
the county facilities building fund that are not needed within 12 months of the date of such
payment to pay principal of and interest on securities issued hereunder or on related securities or
to refund securities shall be used to pay costs of constructing and maintaining the county
facilities herein provided for, or to purchase and retire securities or related securities or to call
securities or related securities for redemption prior to the maturity thereof.
(H) The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or any
other action by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of the securities
hereunder or to the use of the proceeds of the special taxes as provided herein; provided,
however, that the provisions of this amendment shall not become operative unless approved by a
majority of the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon at a referendum election held
for such purpose upon the call of the county commission, and provided further, that if this
amendment is approved by the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon upon its
submission, such election shall constitute a referendum held for such purpose and no further
election need be called.
(I) It is hereby specifically declared that this amendment is not being proposed pursuant to the
provisions of that certain amendment to the Constitution (known as Amendment No. 425) that
was proposed by Act No. 82-330 adopted at the 1982 Regular Session of the legislature of
Alabama, and provisions of the said Amendment 425 are hereby declared to be inapplicable to
this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 445 432.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 445 RATIFIED 1984
Amendment of Amendment No. 432.Fire Protection Districts in Etowah County.
The Etowah county commission is authorized in its discretion to establish fire districts within the
geographical boundaries of Etowah county, said districts to exclude any corporate municipality.
Provided, however, any corporate municipality may request through resolution of its governing
body to become subject to the provisions of this amendment upon the approval of the additional
tax levied herein by a majority of the qualified electors of the corporate municipality.
The county commission is further authorized to enter into agreements with volunteer fire
departments within such county for fire protection and services.
There is hereby levied, in addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter
authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of three mills. The fire
protection tax levied herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal property assessed
by affected property owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of Etowah county,
Alabama, and shall be assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in the county. The
amount collected each year from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be paid into the
county general fund and used in furtherance of fire protection within the affected area. Prior to
the levy of the fire protection tax in a fire district, there shall be submitted to the electors of the
district, at a special election called for that purpose in the district, the question of whether the
said tax shall be levied, and the said tax shall be authorized at such election by a majority of the
qualified electors within any particular fire district of the county or corporate municipality
therein who vote at such election; provided further, that if a majority of the qualified electors of
any of the fire districts participating in the election on the ratification of this amendment shall
vote for the ratification of this amendment, then the approval of this amendment as expressed by
the vote in said district in favor of its ratification shall, of itself, authorize the levy and collection
of the tax for fire protection purposes in that fire district, commencing with the levy for the tax
year for which taxes will become due and payable on October 1, 1985.
Elections on the question of the levy of a district fire protection tax may be held at any time and
from time to time, provided, that if any such election held after the ratification of this amendment
the proposal to levy the tax so submitted should be defeated then the proposal may not be
submitted at another election held in the same district within two years from the last election held
under this amendment.
Any act heretofore enacted regarding said Etowah county fire fighting districts is hereby ratified
and confirmed insofar as it is consistent with this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 446 446.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 446 RATIFIED 1984
Bonds of Alabama State Docks Department not Debt of State.
Bonds or other securities issued by or on behalf of the Alabama state docks department shall not
constitute a debt of the state within the meaning of Section 213 of this Constitution, as heretofore
or hereafter amended, or any similar provision of this Constitution supplemental to, or
superseding, said Section 213, as so amended, if by their terms such bonds or securities do not
constitute a charge on the general credit or tax revenues of the state, but are payable solely from
any or all of the revenues from any or all of the state docks facilities wherever situated (whether
of [or] not such facilities were in existence or owned by or on behalf of the state at the time such
bonds or securities were issued) or from sources other than state taxes, licenses or appropriations;
provided, however, that the proceeds of any fee, tariff or charge (regardless of how denominated
or calculated) collected by the Alabama state docks department in connection with the operation
of the state docks facilities wherever situated shall be considered revenues from such facilities
within the meaning of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 447 447.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 447 RATIFIED 1984
General Obligation Bonds of Mobile County.
Section A. As used in this amendment the following terms shall be given the following
respective meanings:
Section B. Mobile county is hereby authorized to apply proceeds of the special tax to the
payment of the principal of and interest on and premium, if any) that will hereafter mature or
otherwise become payable on the outstanding securities. The right of the county to apply the
proceeds of the special tax for payment of the outstanding securities shall be subject to the
provisions of this Constitution respecting the special tax and the pledge thereof for the benefit of
the outstanding special tax securities. The proceeds of the special tax may be used for payment of
the principal and interest on (and premium, if any) the outstanding securities, whether or not any
bonds are issued hereunder.
Section C. Mobile county is hereby authorized to issue from time to time its bonds for the
purpose of refunding all or any one or more of the issues of outstanding securities. The aggregate
principal amount of all bonds at any time issued under this amendment, when added to the
aggregate principal amount of all then outstanding bonds theretofore issued by the county under
any other amendment to the Constitution of Alabama that are payable from or secured by the
special tax shall not exceed 6 «  per centum of the assessed valuation of taxable property situated
in the county as assessed for county taxation for the fiscal year of the county next preceding that
during which any bonds herein authorized shall be issued.
No bonds may be issued under the authority of this amendment until after the question of the
issuance of such bonds shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of the county at an
election called for that purpose by the governing body of the county and a majority of the said
qualified electors voting at the said election shall have voted in favor of the issuance of such
bonds; provided, that if a majority of the qualified electors of the county participating in the
election on the adoption of this amendment shall vote for the adoption thereof, then the approval
of this amendment expressed by the said vote in favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the
issuance of the bonds provided for in the first sentence of this amendment and no additional
election by the electors of the county shall be required to authorize the issuance of those bonds. If
the majority of the qualified electors of the county participating in the election on the adoption of
this amendment should not vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment, or if the majority of
the qualified electors of the county voting at any election called by the governing body of the
county under the provisions of this amendment should not vote in favor of the issuance of the
bonds proposed at an election so called, the governing body of the county may from time to time
call other elections hereunder on the issuance of such bonds, but not more than one such election
shall be held during any period of twelve consecutive months. Any such election called by the
governing body of the county shall be called, held, conducted and canvassed, and may be
contested, in the manner and within the time provided by the then existing general laws of
Alabama pertaining to elections on the issuance of bonds by counties.
The bonds issued hereunder shall be general obligations of the county for the payment of the
principal of and interest on which the full faith and credit of the county shall be irrevocably
pledged, and in addition thereto there shall be irrevocably pledged for payment of the said
principal and interest so much of the special tax as may be necessary to pay the said principal and
interest at their respective maturities, each such pledge to be on a parity with all valid pledges of
the special tax at any time heretofore or hereafter made, to such extent as shall not impair the
obligations of any then existing valid prior pledges.
All bonds issued under this amendment may be in such aggregate principal amounts, may be in
such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, may be payable in such
installments and at such time or times, not exceeding in the case of each such bond 30 years from
its date, and may contain such provisions not inconsistent with this amendment as shall be
provided in the proceedings of the governing body of the county whereunder such bonds shall be
authorized to be issued. Except as herein otherwise provided, all bonds issued under this
amendment shall be issued in accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of the
general laws of Alabama existing at the time of the issuance of such bonds respecting the sale,
execution, issuance and redemption of bonds by counties. The indebtedness evidenced by the
bonds issued under this amendment or under any other amendment to the Constitution which are
payable out of or are secured by a pledge of the special tax shall be in addition to and shall not be
charged against the limitation on the indebtedness of the county provided for in Section 224 of
the Constitution.
So long as the principal of or interest on any of the bonds issued under this amendment remains
unpaid, the governing body of Mobile county shall continue the levy of the special tax at such
rate as may be sufficient to pay the said principal and interest at their respective maturities. The
rate at which the county may levy the special tax is hereby fixed at 6+ mills on each dollar of the
assessed valuation of properties subject to taxation by the county as assessed for county taxation,
which rate shall be the maximum rate at which the county may levy the special tax except to the
extent that the said rate may be increased pursuant to provisions of this constitution hereafter
adopted. Such rate shall not be subject to adjustment pursuant to the provisions of amendment
195 to the constitution.
Section D. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or
other action by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder, the
levy of the special tax for payment thereof, or the use of the proceeds of the special tax for the
purpose of paying the principal of or interest on the outstanding securities.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 448 448.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 448 RATIFIED 1984
Paramount Duty of Legislature to Make Basic Appropriations at Regular Sessions.
(A) The following words and phrases, whenever used in this amendment, shall have the
following respective meanings:
(B) On or before the second legislative day of each regular session of the legislature, beginning
with the first regular session after January 1, 1983, the governor shall transmit to the legislature
for its consideration a proposed budget for the then next ensuing budget period.
(C) The duty of the legislature at any regular session to make the basic appropriations for any
budget period that will commence before the first day of any succeeding regular session shall be
paramount; and, accordingly, beginning with the first regular session held after January 1, 1983,
no bill (other than a bill making any of the basic appropriations) shall be signed by either the
presiding officer of the house or senate and transmitted to the other house until bills making the
basic appropriations for the then ensuing budget period shall have been signed by the presiding
officer of each house of the legislature in accordance with Section 66 of this Constitution and
presented to the governor in accordance with Section 125 of this Constitution; provided, that this
paragraph (C) shall not affect the adoption of resolutions or the conduct of any other legislative
functions that do not require a third reading; and provided further, that following adoption, by
vote of either house of not less than three-fifths of a quorum present, of a resolution declaring
that the provisions of this paragraph (C) shall not be applicable in that house to a particular bill,
which shall be specified in said resolution by number and title, the bill so specified may proceed
to final passage therein.
(D) Upon the signing and presentation to the governor in accordance with the said Sections 66
and 125 of bills making the basic appropriations, the provisions of the foregoing paragraph (C)
prohibiting the final passage of bills in the house and senate (other than bills making any part of
the basic appropriations) shall cease to be effective and shall not be revived or become again
effective as a result of (i) the subsequent legislative history of any bill so signed and presented,
including any veto, return with executive amendment, or any other action, or failure to act, by
either the governor or the legislature under the provisions of the said Section 125; or (ii) a
determination, by either judicial decree or opinion of the justices of the Alabama Supreme Court,
that any bill so signed and presented is wholly or in part invalid.
(E) The legislature may, by statute or rule, make such further provisions for the timely passage of
bills making the basic appropriations as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Constitution.
(F) Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the legislature to make any
appropriation not otherwise required by this Constitution to be made.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 449 449.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1984 ***

AMENDMENT 449 RATIFIED 1984
Eradication or Control of the Boll Weevil in Cotton.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the legislature may hereafter, by
general law, provide for the eradication or control of the boll weevil in cotton. The legislature
may provide for and is authorized to provide means and methods for the financing of this activity
by prescribing a procedure whereby cotton growers may, by referendum held among such
growers in this state, levy upon themselves and collect assessments, fees and charges, based upon
the amount of acreage of cotton planted. The legislature is authorized to make provisions for
non-payment of such assessments. The legislature shall provide for the collection and
distribution of assessments or charges authorized hereunder and to provide penalties for failure to
pay said assessments. The legislature shall provide for the designation of a non-profit
organization which has been organized for the purpose of eradicating or controlling the boll
weevil in cotton; to administer and carry out said eradication or control program; to also include
conducting elections or referendums among cotton growers.
The legislature shall further provide for the deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure
by the designated organization of any funds received, subject to the supervision and control of
the activities authorized herein by the state department of agriculture and industries and the state
board of agriculture and industries. Assessments, fees, or other charges collected as authorized
by any legislative act adopted under authority hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the
meaning of this Constitution or any provision thereof. The legislature shall further provide a
procedure for the examination and auditing of said organization and for reasonable rules and
regulations to be adopted by the state board of agriculture and industries; to effectively carry out
the intent and purposes herein enumerated. Any uniformity requirements of this Constitution
shall be satisfied by the application of the program to eradicate or control the boll weevil in
cotton.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 450 450.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1985 ***

AMENDMENT 450 RATIFIED 1985
Alabama Trust Fund.
Section 1. For the continuing benefit of the state of Alabama and the citizens thereof, there is
hereby created an irrevocable, permanent trust fund named "the Alabama trust fund" which shall
be funded and administered in accordance with the provisions of this amendment.
Section 2. As used in this amendment, the following words and phrases shall have the following
respective meanings:
Section 3. (a) The trust fund shall be under the management and control of the board, and all
powers necessary or appropriate for the management and control of the trust fund shall be vested
solely in the board. The board shall have a membership of nine trustees consisting of the
governor, the state treasurer, the director of finance (or such other official as may by law succeed
to the responsibilities of the director of finance), three trustees appointed by the governor, two
trustees appointed by the lieutenant governor, and one trustee appointed by the speaker of the
house of representatives. The governor, the state treasurer and the director of finance shall each
serve as a trustee ex officio, and the service of each such official as a trustee shall begin and end
concurrently with the beginning and end of his or her tenure in such office. As promptly as
practicable after the effective date of this amendment, the other trustees shall be appointed for the
following initial terms: The trustees to be appointed by the governor shall be appointed for terms
beginning immediately upon their respective appointments and ending at noon on October 1, in
the first, second and third calendar years, respectively, next following the calendar year in which
this amendment shall become effective; the trustees to be appointed by the lieutenant governor
shall be appointed for terms beginning immediately upon their respective appointments and
ending at noon on October 1, in the fourth and fifth calendar years, respectively, next following
the calendar year in which this amendment shall become effective; and the trustee to be
appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives shall be appointed for a term beginning
immediately upon his or her appointment and ending at noon on October 1, in the sixth calendar
year next following the calendar year in which this amendment shall become effective.
Thereafter, the term of office of each appointed trustee shall be six years, commencing at noon
on October 1 on which the term of the immediate predecessor trustee shall end.
(b) If at any time there shall be a vacancy among the appointed trustees, a successor trustee shall
be appointed to serve for the unexpired term applicable to such vacancy. The appointment of
each appointed trustee (other than those initially appointed), whether for a full six-year term or to
complete an unexpired term, shall be made by the same officer of the state who appointed the
trustee whose term shall have expired or is to expire or in whose position on the board a vacancy
otherwise exists and shall be made not earlier than 30 days prior to the date on which such trustee
is to take office as such. Each appointed trustee shall hold office from the effective date of his or
her appointment by and with the consent of the senate and shall hold office until his or her
successor is appointed as provided for herein. Trustees shall be eligible for reappointment
without limit as to the number of terms previously served.
(c) At the beginning of each session of the legislature the governor shall certify to the senate for
confirmation the names of all who shall have been appointed as trustees since the
commencement of the last session of the legislature.
(d) Each appointed trustee shall, at the time of his or her appointment and at all times during his
or her term of office, be a qualified elector of the state, and a failure by any trustee to remain so
qualified during such term shall cause a vacancy of the office of such trustee. Each appointed
trustee shall have recognized competence and experience in the evaluation and management of
investments. Any appointed trustee may be impeached and removed from office as a trustee in
the same manner and on the same grounds provided in section 174 of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, or successor provision thereof, and the general laws of the state for
impeachment and removal of the officers of the state subject to said section 174 or successor
provision thereof. The governor, the state treasurer and the director of finance may not be
impeached and removed from office as trustees apart from their impeachment and removal from
the respective offices by virtue of which, ex officio, they serve as trustees.
(e) The governor, the state treasurer and the director of finance shall be entitled to vote, and shall
perform the duties of trustees, ex officio, without any compensation other than that to which they
are respectively entitled as governor, state treasurer and director of finance. Appointed trustees
shall be entitled to such compensation for their services as may from time to time be provided by
law duly enacted by the legislature, but the power to provide compensation of appointed trustees
shall be discretionary with the legislature and nothing in this amendment shall be construed to
confer upon such trustees an absolute right to any compensation for their services. Each trustee
shall be reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the performance of his or her duties as a
trustee.
(f) A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business by the
board, and decisions shall be made on the basis of a majority of the quorum then present and
voting, with each trustee to have a single vote. No vacancy in the membership of the board or the
voluntary disqualification or abstention of any trustee shall impair the right of a quorum to
exercise all of the powers and duties of the board. The governor shall be the chairman and
presiding officer of the board. The director of finance shall be vice chairman, and the state
treasurer shall serve as secretary. The board may appoint such other officers to perform such
duties, not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment or applicable law, as the board
shall deem necessary or appropriate. In addition to such regular meetings of the board as may be
provided by law or by bylaws or rules duly adopted by the board, special meetings of the board
may be called by the governor acting alone or by any three other trustees acting in concert, in
each case upon two days' notice to each trustee given in person or by registered letter or
telegram; provided, however, that such notice to each trustee may be waived by such trustee,
either before or after the meeting with respect to which such notice would otherwise be required.
Any meeting held by the board for any purpose shall be open to the public, except that executive
sessions may be held by the board when the character or good name of a person is involved. All
proceedings of the board, except executive sessions, shall be reduced to writing on behalf of the
board and maintained in the permanent records of the board, a copy of which shall be filed in the
principal office of the board and shall be open for public inspection there during regular business
hours. The principal office of the board shall be the principal office of the director of finance.
(g) No trustee shall vote on or participate in the discussion or consideration of any matter coming
before the board in which such trustee, personally or through family connections or business
associations, has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest, including, but without limitation
thereto, decisions of the board concerning the investment of moneys constituting part of the trust
fund in any deposit or obligation of any bank or corporation in which such trustee may have such
an interest. If there shall be brought before the board any matter in which a trustee shall have any
interest which may conflict with his or her duties as a trustee, he or she shall immediately make a
complete disclosure to the board of such interest and shall thereafter withdraw from participation
in any deliberation and decision of the board with respect to such matter.
(h) The board shall have all of the powers necessary to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this amendment, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
following powers:
(i) The expenses of making and disposing of investments, such as brokerage commissions, legal
expenses referable to a particular transaction, transfer taxes and other customary transactional
expenses shall be payable out of any trust income of the trust fund. The legislature shall provide
for the administrative and other necessary expenses of the board in the same manner as it
provides for the expenses of operating other departments and agencies of the state.
Section 4. (a) There shall be transferred from the general fund of the state into the trust fund, as
the initial trust capital, moneys in an amount equal to the sum of all proceeds of any oil and gas
capital payments received by the state pursuant to the sealed bids awarded on August 14, 1984,
including any revenues and earnings deposited in any fund pursuant to section 9-17-68, Code of
Alabama 1975; provided, however, that the division of lands of the department of conservation
and natural resources shall be entitled to four percent of the $347,483,000 which has been
received by the state pursuant to the sealed bids awarded on August 14, 1984, which sum shall be
carried in the state treasury to the credit of the state lands fund.
Promptly following the effective date of this amendment, the state treasurer shall take all actions
necessary to transfer to the board the possession, control and management of the initial trust
capital. If at the time of such transfer into the trust fund all or part of the initial trust capital is
invested in certificates of deposit or other investments which cannot be converted into cash prior
to the maturity thereof without loss of interest or other penalty, the state treasurer shall directly
transfer such certificates of deposit or other investments to the board as part of the initial trust
capital without first converting the same into cash. In the event that any certificates of deposit or
other investments shall be transferred into the trust fund, the initial trust capital shall not include
the income or profit from such certificates of deposit or other investments that has been received
by the state on or before such transfer or that constitutes accrued interest, amortized discount or
other amounts which in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, should be
considered as having been earned by the state as of the date of such transfer. Any such income or
profits from such certificates of deposit or other investments that has been received by the state
on or before such transfer shall remain in the general fund subject to appropriation by the
legislature. To the extent that any income or profit derived from such certificates of deposits or
other investments is referable to any period after the transfer thereof into the trust fund, such
income or profit shall not constitute trust capital nor trust income but shall remain in the general
fund subject to appropriation by the legislature.
(b) The trust capital shall be augmented by (i) such other moneys or assets as the legislature may
by law appropriate and transfer to the trust fund as a permanent part thereof; (ii) such other
moneys or assets as may be contributed to the trust fund from any source; and (iii) all proceeds of
any oil and gas capital payments as defined in this amendment subsequent to August 14, 1984;
provided, however, that the division of lands of the department of conservation and natural
resources shall be entitled to one percent of all proceeds of any oil and gas capital payments as
defined in this amendment subsequent to August 14, 1984, which sum shall be carried in the
state treasury to the credit of the state lands fund. In addition, within 90 days after September 1,
2001, the board of trustees of the Alabama heritage trust fund shall transfer the trust capital of the
Alabama heritage trust fund to the Alabama trust fund and shall transfer the trust income of the
Alabama heritage trust fund to the state general fund. The trust capital received by the Alabama
trust fund from the Alabama heritage trust fund shall thereafter be trust capital of the Alabama
trust fund. The Alabama heritage trust fund, the board of trustees of the Alabama heritage trust
fund, and all other aspects of the Alabama heritage trust fund shall terminate and dissolve 90
days after September 1, 2001.
(c) Provided, however, beginning with state fiscal year 1989-90, one percent of the income from
the Alabama trust fund shall be reinvested in the Alabama trust fund; two percent of such income
shall be reinvested in the following year; and one additional percent of such income each
subsequent year shall be reinvested until a total of 10 percent of such income from the Alabama
trust fund each year shall be reinvested in the Alabama trust fund.
Section 5. (a) The trust capital shall be held in perpetual trust and shall not be appropriated by the
legislature or expended or disbursed for any purpose other than to acquire eligible investments in
accordance with the provisions of this amendment. All eligible investments acquired, in whole or
in part, with moneys constituting part of the trust capital shall to the extent of such moneys
constitute part of the trust capital, but any trust income derived therefrom shall be paid directly
into the general fund as it is received by the board, subject to appropriation and withdrawal by
the legislature.
(b) To the extent practicable, the board shall keep all moneys at any time held in the trust fund
invested in such eligible investments as shall, in its sole and uncontrolled judgment, produce the
greatest trust income over the term of such investments while preserving the trust capital. In
making any investment of moneys held in the trust fund, the board shall exercise the judgment
and care, under the circumstances prevailing at the time of such investment, which an
institutional investor of the highest standard of prudence, intelligence and financial expertise
would exercise in the management and investment of large assets entrusted to it not for the
purpose of speculative profit but for the permanent generation and disposition of funds,
considering the probable safety of capital as well as the expected amount and frequency of
income. The board shall have full power and authority to select the eligible investments in which
moneys held in the trust fund shall at any time be invested, and, to the extent not inconsistent
with any express provision of this amendment, the eligible investments so selected shall be
acquired from such issuers, underwriters, brokers or other sellers on such terms and conditions;
shall be acquired for purchase prices reflecting such discount below or premium above the par or
face amount thereof; shall bear such dates and be in such form, denominations and series; shall
mature or be subject to mandatory redemption on such dates; shall bear interest at such rate or
rates payable at such intervals or, alternatively, shall provide income to the holder thereof in such
manner (including, without limitation thereto, the purchase of such investments at a discount
which represents all or part of the income or profit derived therefrom); shall be unsecured or
secured in such manner and subject to the provisions of Section 2, paragraphs 2 and 3; shall
contain such provisions for prepayment or redemption at the option of the issuer or obligor; and
shall contain or be subject to such other provisions as shall, in all of the foregoing respects, be
determined by the board in exercise of its sole and uncontrolled judgment. The board shall have
full power and authority to invest the trust capital in any eligible investments producing trust
income in accordance with such schedule as the board shall, in the exercise of its sole and
uncontrolled judgment, determine to be in the best interests of the state, and in determining such
schedule the board may emphasize future benefits in preference to near-term needs. The board
shall have complete and uncontrolled discretion in making decisions as to when moneys in the
trust fund shall be invested, as to the purchase price or other acquisition cost to be paid or
incurred in acquiring investments for the trust fund, as to when investments constituting part of
the trust fund shall be sold, liquidated or otherwise disposed of, and, as to the amount and nature
of the price or other consideration to be received by the trust fund upon the sale, liquidation or
other disposition of investments constituting part of the trust fund. No law shall be enacted nor
any action taken by the executive department of the state which impairs or interferes with the
power, authority and discretion conferred upon the board by this amendment with respect to the
acquisition, management, control and disposition of investments at any time constituting part of
the trust fund.
(c) To the extent appropriate and not at the time prohibited by law, the board shall use the
facilities of the state treasurer in the administration of the trust fund, including, but without
limitation thereto, the keeping of records, the management of bank accounts, the transfer of funds
and the safekeeping of securities evidencing investments.
(d) The board shall cause an annual audit of the trust fund to be performed for each fiscal year by
the state examiners of public accounts or, in the discretion of the board, by an independent
certified public accounting firm and shall cause a report of such audit to be prepared in
accordance with applicable accounting principles. The board shall cause to be prepared and
publicized such financial and other information concerning the trust fund as may from time to
time be provided by law duly enacted by the legislature, but in the absence of any law directing
the preparation and publication of different reports, the board shall cause to be prepared and
made public, within 30 days after the end of each quarterly period in each fiscal year, a report
containing (i) a statement of the trust capital then held in the trust fund showing any changes
thereto since the last quarterly report, (ii) a statement of the trust income received during the
quarterly period in question, (iii) a statement of the investments then held in the trust fund
including descriptions thereof and the respective values thereof, (iv) a statement of the trust
income received to date during the current fiscal year, and (v) any other information determined
by the board to reflect a full and complete disclosure of the financial operations of the fund.
Section 6. An individual trustee shall not in any way be personally liable for any liability, loss or
expense suffered by the trust fund unless such liability, loss or expense arises out of or results
from the willful misconduct or wrongdoing of such trustee.
Section 7. This amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall have the right and
power to enact laws supplemental to this amendment and in furtherance of the purposes and
objectives thereof, provided that such laws are not inconsistent with the express provisions of
this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 451 451.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1985 ***

AMENDMENT 451 RATIFIED 1985
Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
The legislature by general law may provide for the creation and organization of a commission
charged with the responsibility of improving soil and water conservation and forestry practices
within the state, and in order to further the carrying out of that responsibility the legislature may
appropriate moneys to such commission for the purpose of meeting the expenses of the
commission and to allow the commission to share, through a cost-sharing award or grant
program, the costs of soil conservation projects and practices, water quality improvements,
reforestation projects and improved forestry practices on or with respect to agricultural or timber
lands in the state owned or operated by individuals or other types of persons specified by the
legislature, sections 93 and 94 of this Constitution, as amended, to the contrary notwithstanding.
In any law enacted by the legislature respecting soil and water conservation cost-sharing grants
as contemplated hereby, the legislature shall provide for the powers of the commission and for
the receipt, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by such commission of any appropriated
moneys and other funds received by the commission to fund its expenses and cost-sharing
programs. The legislature shall provide that such commission shall consist of such citizens of the
state [as] may be designated by law by the legislature, provided that [the] legislature may
designate as ex officio members of the commission persons who are holders of other public
offices or officers of such private organizations and associations as the legislature may designate
that are interested in agricultural or timber property and soil and water conservation practices
related thereto. Moneys appropriated to such commission for cost-sharing grants to be made
pursuant to criteria provided by the legislature or promulgated by the commission pursuant to
legislative delegation of the power so to do, shall be invested by the commission at its direction,
or retained in the state treasury as the commission shall determine, until expended at the direction
of the commission, provided that none of such appropriated moneys shall revert to the fund or
funds from which they were appropriated in the event such moneys remain undisbursed or
unencumbered on the last day of the fiscal year of the state in which they were appropriated to
the commission, but rather shall remain available for disbursement by the commission in its
programs in subsequent fiscal years.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 452 201.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1985 ***

AMENDMENT 452 RATIFIED 1985
Amendment of Amendment No. 201.
Promotion of Cattle Industry.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the legislature may hereafter, by
general law, provide for the promotion of the production, distribution, marketing, use,
improvement and sale of cattle. The legislature may provide for the promotion of cattle and the
cattle industry by research, education, advertising and other methods, and the legislature is
further authorized to provide means and methods for the financing of any such promotional
activity by prescribing a procedure whereby owners of cattle may by referendum held among the
owners of cattle in this state levy upon themselves and collect assessments, fees, or charges upon
the sale of cattle for the financing of any promotional program or activity in cooperation with
processors, dealers and handlers of cattle. The legislature shall make provisions for the
nonpayment of assessments by cattle owners, and for the refund of assessments to any cattle
owner dissatisfied with the assessment program. The legislature shall provide for the collection
and distribution of any such assessments or charges by dealers, handlers, processors and
purchasers of cattle and provide penalties for failure to make collection and distribution of such
assessments. The legislature shall provide for the designation of a nonprofit association or
organization organized for the promotion and betterment of cattle and beef products to
administer and carry out such promotional program which shall include the conducting of
elections or referendums among cattle owners. The legislature shall further provide for the
deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by the designated association of any funds
received subject to the supervision and control of the activities authorized herein by the
department of agriculture and industries and the state board of agriculture and industries.
Assessments, fees or other charges collected as authorized by any legislative act adopted in
pursuance hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the meaning of this Constitution or any
provision thereof. Any uniformity requirements of this Constitution shall be satisfied by the
application of the program upon cattle and beef products.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 453 453.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 453 RATIFIED 1986
Promotion of Grain Industry.
The legislature may hereafter, by general law, provide for the promotion of the production,
distribution, improvement, marketing, use and sale of wheat and other feed grains as defined and
authorized by the legislature. The legislature may provide for the promotion of wheat and other
feed grains and wheat and other feed grain products by research, education, advertising and other
methods. The legislature is further authorized to provide means and methods for the financing of
any such promotional activity by prescribing a procedure whereby producers of wheat and other
feed grains may by referendum among such producers levy upon themselves and collect
assessments, fees, or charges upon the sale of wheat and other feed grains for the financing of
any such promotional program or activity in cooperation with buyers, processors, dealers, and
handlers of wheat and other feed grains. The legislature may make provisions for the non-
payment of assessments by wheat and other feed grain producers, and shall make provisions for
the refund of assessments to any wheat and other feed grain producer who does not desire to
participate in an assessment program. The legislature shall provide for the collection,
disbursement, distribution or expenditure of assessments or charges authorized hereunder and to
provide penalties for failure to make collection and distribution of assessments. The legislature
shall provide for the designation of a nonprofit association or organization for the promotion and
betterment of wheat and other feed grains and wheat and other feed grain products to administer
and carry out such promotional program which shall include the conducting of elections or
referendums among producers of wheat and other feed grains. The legislature may provide the
manner by which such referendum is held, including the procedure for application for approval to
conduct the referendum, the appropriate action to be taken by the state board of agriculture and
industries on such application, the requirements and eligibility of the association or organization
which will conduct such referendum, the procedures for voting and eligibility to vote in such
referendum, the details of the conduct of such referendum. The legislature shall further provide
for the deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by the designated association of any
funds received subject to the supervision and control of the activities as authorized herein by the
department of agriculture and industries and the state board of agriculture and industries. The
legislature shall further provide a procedure whereby said association or organization is bonded,
for the examination and auditing of said association or organization, and for reasonably
necessary rules and regulations to be adopted by the state board of agriculture and industries to
effectively carry out the intent and purposes herein enumerated. Assessments, fees or other
charges collected as authorized by any legislative act adopted under authority hereof shall not be
considered as a tax within the meaning of the Constitution or any provision thereof. Any
uniformity requirements of this Constitution shall be satisfied by the application of the program
upon wheat and other feed grains.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 454 454.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 454 RATIFIED 1986
Conveyance of Alabama State Docks Department Property.
The state of Alabama, through the Alabama state docks department, is authorized to convey,
without consideration, title to its real property, equipment and facilities located in Lauderdale
county, Alabama, and known as the Alabama State Docks to the Florence-Lauderdale County
Port Authority, a public corporation, but subject to existing leases and other contractual
agreements now in effect. Any laws or parts of laws or any provisions of the Constitution of
1901, as amended, which are in conflict with this amendment are hereby revised, superseded and
repealed to the extent they are in conflict with this amendment.
The state of Alabama, through the Alabama state docks department, is authorized to convey,
without consideration, title to its real property, equipment and facilities located in Morgan
county, Alabama, and known as the Alabama State Docks to the Decatur-Morgan County Port
Authority, a public corporation, and in Walker county, Alabama, known as the State Docks in
Cordova in Walker county to the Walker county commission, but subject to existing leases and
other contractual agreements now in effect. Any laws or parts of laws or any provisions of the
Constitution of 1901, as amended, which are in conflict with this amendment are hereby revised,
superseded and repealed to the extent they are in conflict with this amendment. The provisions
herein shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 455 455.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 455 RATIFIED 1986
Repeal of School Tax Exemptions in Madison County.
All exemptions authorized by section 40-9-19, Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, against that
portion of any local ad valorem taxes levied on any property situated in Madison county that
upon collection has the proceeds thereof earmarked for public school purposes are hereby
repealed and such exemptions shall no longer be granted against said portion of such local taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 456 456.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 456 RATIFIED 1986
Hartselle City School Taxes.
The school district taxes now levied and collected for the Hartselle city board of education and
authorized by law shall be continued upon approval of this amendment by the qualified electors
voting thereon in said school district. Said taxes shall be continued for a period of thirty years,
commencing October 1, 1987. Notice shall be given, the ballot prepared and the election
conducted in the same manner as required by law for elections on school district taxes and
constitutional amendments. The ballot shall be substantially as follows: "For continuation of all
school district taxes now provided by law? Yes   No  ." If a majority of the qualified electors
voting thereon shall vote in favor of continuing such taxes then the said taxes shall be continued;
if a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon vote in opposition of continuing such taxes
then the provisions of this act shall become null and void and have no effect.
Only the persons who at the time of the election are qualified voters of said district 70 shall be
entitled to participate in the question.
The provisions of this act shall be construed in pari materia with all other provisions relating to
school district taxes in Morgan county, except as there is a direct conflict herewith.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 457 457.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 457 RATIFIED 1986
Morgan County Sheriff's Reserve.
The Morgan county commission is authorized to grant money to the Morgan county sheriff's
reserve. Any purchases with said monies &lsqb;moneys&rsqb; in the Morgan county sheriff's
reserve shall be the property of the Morgan county sheriff's office.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 458 458.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 458 RATIFIED 1986
Truck Tax Established by Pike County Commission.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the Pike county commission is hereby authorized to
establish, by validly enacted ordinance, the rate of all local ad valorem taxes, whether levied by
local governing bodies of other lawful entities, on all truck-tractors, trailers and semitrailers
located within the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 459 459.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 459 RATIFIED 1986
Judge of Probate of Randolph County.
The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate
and alter the fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be charged or received by the judge of
probate of Randolph county, and may put such officer on a salary basis and provide for operation
of his office on such basis.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 460 460.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 460 RATIFIED 1986
Annexation in St. Clair County.
Any municipality that was not located wholly or in part within the boundaries of St. Clair county
prior to January 1, 1985, shall not annex any territory within St. Clair county without the
approval of the electorate of St. Clair county expressed in a vote on the issue of said annexation.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any municipality incorporated in the future
that lies entirely within the boundaries of St. Clair county.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any territory presently annexed within St.
Clair county by a municipality located outside of the county.
The legislature may pass local or general acts to supplement this amendment, so long as such
acts do not contravene the provisions of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 461 461.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 461 RATIFIED 1986
Additional Ad Valorem Tax in Wilcox County.
There is hereby levied an additional ad valorem tax, in Wilcox county, on taxable property, at a
rate not to exceed an additional 10 mills on each dollar of taxable property in such county. The
net revenues generated by said additional tax shall be allocated in the county treasury in the
following manner:
3 mills to the public school fund;
7 mills to the county general fund.
The provisions of this amendment shall be implemented upon its passage and ratification.
Act 85-410, H. 777, Regular Session 1985, a constitutional amendment proposing higher ad
valorem taxes and which proposed act is pending ratification by the people, is hereby repealed
and rescinded.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 462 462.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 462 RATIFIED 1986
City of Ozark Special Property Tax.
The city of Ozark shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to
all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not
exceeding seven-tenths of one percent of the value of the taxable property situated within the
corporate limits of the city, as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds
of which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes, but may be pledged to the payment
of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness issued for
public school purposes, which pledges shall take priority as provided in such bonds, warrants or
other evidences of indebtedness; provided that such tax and the purpose or purposes thereof and
the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. Elections
on proposals to levy this tax on property situated within the corporate limits of Ozark shall be
ordered and held in the same manner as provided by the law applicable to municipal corporations
for elections to authorize the issuance of municipal bonds. The additional tax, authorized by this
amendment to be levied on property situated within the corporate limits of Ozark&lsqb;,&rsqb;
shall be collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and laws as other taxes
levied on property by the city of Ozark are collected, and the revenues derived from this tax shall
be used solely for school construction and other educational purposes within the limits of the city
of Ozark.
If any proposal to levy a tax hereunder is defeated in any election, subsequent elections thereon
may be held at any time.
This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 463 463.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 463 RATIFIED 1986
Mobile County Bond Issuance.
Section A. As used in this amendment the following terms shall be given the following
respective meanings:
Section B. The county is hereby authorized to issue from time to time its bonds, not exceeding
$14,500,000 in aggregate principal amount, of which not in excess of $2,000,000 in aggregate
principal amount shall be issued for the purpose of acquiring and improving, alone or in
conjunction with other counties or municipal corporations, certain land located in the county for
use by the Department of the Navy of the United States of America; not in excess of $2,000,000
in aggregate principal amount shall be issued for the purpose of acquiring and/or developing
land, in one or more locations, for use as one or more industrial parks; not in excess of $500,000
in aggregate principal amount shall be issued for the purpose of constructing and equipping an
intergovernmental office and service center for agricultural agencies; not in excess of $3,500,000
in aggregate principal amount shall be issued for the purpose of acquiring, constructing and
equipping additions and improvements to the present county courthouse building in the county;
not in excess of $4,500,000 in aggregate principal amount shall be issued for the purpose of
acquiring, constructing and equipping additions and improvements to the present county jail
facilities in the county; and not in excess of $2,000,000 in aggregate principal amount shall be
issued for the purpose of refunding all or any portion of the outstanding warrants.
Section C. The county is hereby authorized to issue from time to time its bonds for the purpose
of refunding all or any portion of any obligations of the county outstanding as of October 1, 1986
which are payable out of the proceeds of the special tax. Such bonds may be issued in any
principal amount so long as the net proceeds of the sale thereof, after payment of expenses of
issuance and sale thereof, do not exceed the principal amount of the obligations to be refunded.
Part of the cash proceeds paid to the county at the time of the sale of any such refunding bonds as
a result of decreased debt service may be used by the governing body of the county to finance
salary increases or bonuses for employees of the county, not to exceed five percent (5%) across
the board for all employees.
Section D. The aggregate principal amount of all bonds at any time issued under this amendment,
when added to the aggregate principal amount of all then outstanding bonds theretofore issued by
the county under any other amendment to the Constitution of Alabama that are payable from or
secured by the special tax shall not exceed 6 «  per centum of the assessed valuation of the
taxable property situated in the county as assessed for state taxation for the state tax year next
preceding that during which any bonds herein authorized shall be issued.
No bonds may be issued under the authority of this amendment until after the question of the
issuance of such bonds shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of the county at any
election called for that purpose by the governing body of the county and a majority of the said
qualified electors voting at the said election shall have voted in favor of the issuance of such
bonds; provided, that if a majority of the qualified electors of the county participating in the
election at which this amendment is voted on and voting on the question of the adoption of this
amendment shall vote for the adoption thereof, then the approval of this amendment expressed
by the said vote in favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the issuance of the bonds
provided for in this amendment and no additional election by the electors of the county shall be
required to authorize the issuance of the said bonds. If the majority of the qualified electors of the
county participating in the election at which this amendment is voted on and voting on the
question of the adoption of this amendment should not vote in favor of the adoption of this
amendment, or if the majority of the qualified electors of the county voting at any election called
by the governing body of the county under the provisions of this amendment should not vote in
favor of the issuance of the bonds proposed at an election so called, the governing body of the
county may from time to time call other elections hereunder on the issuance of such bonds, but
not more than one such election shall be held during any period of twelve consecutive months.
Any such election called by the governing body of the county shall be called, held, conducted
and canvassed, and may be contested, in the manner and within the time provided by the then
existing general laws of Alabama pertaining to elections on the issuance of bonds by counties.
The bonds issued hereunder shall be general obligations of the county for the payment of the
principal of and interest on which the full faith and credit of the county shall be irrevocably
pledged, and in addition thereto there shall be irrevocably pledged for payment of the said
principal and interest so much of the special tax as may be necessary to pay the said principal and
interest at the respective maturities of such bonds, each such pledge to be on a parity with all
valid pledges of the special tax at any time heretofore or hereafter made, to such extent as shall
not impair the obligation of any than existing valid prior pledges.
Bonds may be issued under this amendment in one or more series, and may bear interest which is
tax exempt under the laws of the state of Alabama and the United States of America or which is
not exempt from such taxation. Bonds issued hereunder may be sold at either public or private
sale in such manner, at such price or prices and at such time or times as may be determined by
the governing body of the county to be most advantageous. The principal of each series of bonds
issued under this amendment shall mature in annual installments, the first of which installments
shall mature not later than three (3) years after the date of the bonds of that series and the last of
which shall mature not later than thirty (30) years after the date of the bonds of that series and
otherwise may mature in such amounts during each fiscal year of the county as the governing
body of the county shall determine, without regard to the limitations set forth in the amendment
to the Constitution known as Amendment CLII [152]; provided, that the maturities of each series
of bonds issued under this amendment shall be arranged so that the aggregate amount of
principal and interest that will mature in any one fiscal year with respect to that series of bonds,
and also all other bonds theretofore issued by the county and then outstanding that are payable
out of or secured by a pledge of the special tax, shall not exceed the amount of the proceeds
collected from the special tax during the then next preceding tax year. Except as herein otherwise
provided, all bonds issued under this amendment shall be issued in accordance with, and shall be
subject to, the provisions of the general laws of Alabama existing at the time of the issuance of
such bonds respecting the sale, execution, issuance and redemption of bonds by counties. The
indebtedness evidenced by the bonds issued under this amendment or under any other
amendment to the Constitution which are payable out of or are secured by a pledge of the special
tax shall be in addition to and shall not be charged against the limitation on the indebtedness of
the county provided for in section 224 of the Constitution.
The governing body of the county shall comply with the provisions of the state of Alabama
competitive bid law (section 41-16-20, et seq., Code of Alabama of 1975), to the extent such law
is applicable.
Section E. So long as the principal of or interest on any of the bonds issued under this
amendment remains unpaid, the governing body of the county shall continue the levy of the
special tax at such rate as may be sufficient to pay the said principal and interest at their
respective maturities; provided, that the total rate of the special tax that may be levied and
collected for payment of the said bonds and all other bonds payable out of or secured by a pledge
of the special tax shall not exceed the rate at which the county may levy the special tax as fixed
under the amendment to the Constitution known as Amendment CDXLVII [447], except to the
extent that the said rate may be increased pursuant to provisions of this Constitution hereafter
adopted. Such rate shall not be subject to adjustment pursuant to the provisions of the
amendment to the Constitution known as Amendment CXCV [195].
Section F. This amendment is not intended to ratify or validate any contractual arrangements
heretofore or hereafter entered into with respect to the sale of any bonds issued and sold
hereunder.
Section G. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from, or
other action by, the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder or
the levy of the special tax for payment thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 464 464.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 464 RATIFIED 1986
Clarke County Fire Districts.
The Clarke county commission is hereby authorized in its discretion to establish fire districts
within the geographical boundaries of Clarke county. The boundaries of such fire districts may
be rearranged at the discretion of the county commission as it deems necessary, from time to
time, to maximize fire protection services in the county. The county commission may use the
corporate limits of the various towns and municipalities in the county as boundaries for fire
districts. In such situations, such town or municipal fire district shall have its own volunteer fire
department functioning within its boundaries. Each fire district established in an area located
outside of the corporate limits of a town or municipality shall likewise have its own volunteer
fire department functioning strictly within its district boundaries.
The county commission is further authorized to enter into agreements with volunteer fire
departments within such county for fire protection and services.
There is hereby levied, in addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter
authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of two mills. The fire
protection tax levied herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal property assessed
by affected property owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of Clarke county,
Alabama, and shall be assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in the county. The
amount collected each year from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be paid into the
county general fund and used in furtherance of fire protection within the affected area. Prior to
the levy of the fire protection tax in said county, there shall be submitted to the electors of said
county, at a special election called for that purpose in said county, the question of whether the
said tax shall be levied, and the said tax shall be authorized at such election by a majority of the
qualified electors within the said county who vote at such election; provided further, that if a
majority of the qualified electors of said county participating in the election on the ratification of
this amendment shall vote for the ratification of this amendment, then the approval of this
amendment as expressed by the vote in said county in favor of its ratification shall, of itself,
authorize the levy and collection of the tax for fire protection purposes in said county,
commencing with the levy for the tax year for which taxes will become due and payable on
October 1, 1987.
Elections on the question of the levy of a fire protection tax in said county may be held at any
time and from time to time, provided, that if any such election held after the ratification of this
amendment the proposal to levy the tax so submitted should be defeated then the proposal may
not be submitted at another election held in said county within two years from the last election
held under this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 465 465.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 465 RATIFIED 1986
City of Jackson Port Authority.
Section 1. The governing body of the city of Jackson, Clarke county, Alabama, is hereby
authorized to declare by the adoption of appropriate resolution, the need for the formation of a
public corporation to carry out the provisions of this act. Upon the adoption of such resolution
the governing body of the city of Jackson shall appoint five persons, each of whom must be a
duly qualified elector and property owner in the said city of Jackson, who shall form the board of
directors of such corporation and shall proceed to organize such corporation.
Section 2. (a) The certificate of incorporation shall set forth:
(b) The name designated for the corporation in the certificate of incorporation shall be one
indicating the purpose thereof, such as the "city of Jackson port authority" or some other name of
similar import.
(c) The certificate of incorporation shall be subscribed and acknowledged by each of the persons
forming the corporation before an officer or officers authorized by the laws of the state of
Alabama to take acknowledgements to deeds, and the certificate of incorporation shall have
attached thereto a certified copy of the resolution provided for in section 1, and a certificate by
the secretary of state that the name proposed for the corporation is not identical with that of any
other corporation in the state or so nearly similar thereto as to lead to confusion and uncertainty.
Section 3. The certificate of incorporation, when executed and acknowledged in conformity with
section 2, shall be filed with the judge of probate of Clarke county and with the secretary of state.
The judge of probate shall thereupon examine the certificate of incorporation and, if he finds that
the recitals contained therein are correct, that the requirements of section 2 have been complied
with, and that the name is not identical with or so nearly similar to that of another corporation
already in existence in this state so as to lead to confusion and uncertainty, he shall approve the
certificate of incorporation and record it in an appropriate book or record in his office and shall
also file the certificate of incorporation with the secretary of state. When such certificate is so
filed, the corporation referred to therein shall come into existence and shall constitute a public
body corporate and politic, vested with the rights and powers herein granted.
Section 4. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation incorporated under the provisions of
this amendment may at any time and from time to time be amended in the manner provided in
this section. The board shall first adopt a resolution adopting an amendment to the certificate of
incorporation which shall be set forth in full in the said resolution and which amendment may
include any matters which might have been included in the original certificate of incorporation.
After the adoption of the resolution proposing an amendment to the certificate of incorporation of
the corporation by the board, the president and secretary of the board shall sign and file for
record in the office of the judge of probate in Clarke county and in the office of the secretary of
state a certificate in the name of and in behalf of the corporation under its seal, reciting the
adoption of said resolution by the board. The judge of probate for Clarke county shall thereupon
record such certificate in an appropriate book in his office. When such certificate has been so
filed and recorded, such amendment shall become effective, and the certificate of incorporation
shall thereupon be amended to the extent provided in the amendment.
Section 5. (a) The corporation shall have a board of directors in which all of the powers of the
corporation shall be vested pursuant to its authority, and which shall consist of five members.
The directors shall be appointed by the governing body of the city of Jackson; the places on the
board shall be numbered from one through five as follows, and the terms of office of the
directors shall be staggered, and, to that end, the initial terms of office of the initial directors shall
be as follows: Two (2) years as to Place One; three (3) years as to Place Two; four (4) years as to
Place Three; five (5) years as to Place Four; and six (6) years as to Place Five. After the initial
terms as to each such place on the board, the terms of office as to that place shall be four (4)
years. Only members of the city council of the city of Jackson, then serving as such, shall be
eligible for appointment to and, except as hereinafter shown, may serve in Place Three on said
board. If any director resigns or dies or becomes incapable of acting as a director or ceases to
reside in the city of Jackson or is otherwise disqualified to act, the governing body of the city of
Jackson shall appoint a successor to serve for the unexpired term. Directors shall be eligible for
reappointment to succeed themselves in office, if they are otherwise qualified to serve. If at the
expiration of any term of office of any director, or, if the director serving in Place Three ceases to
be a member of the city council of the city of Jackson, and a successor to such director shall not
have been appointed, then and in either such event such director shall nevertheless continue to
hold such office until a qualified successor has been appointed.
(b) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but any meeting of such board may be adjourned from time to time by a majority of the
directors present or may be so adjourned by a single director if such director is the only director
present at such meeting. No vacancy in the membership of the board shall impair the right of a
quorum to exercise all the powers and duties of the authority. Any matter in which the board is
authorized to act may be acted upon at a regular, special or called meeting. At the request of any
director, the vote on any question before the board shall be taken by ayes and nays entered upon
the record. All proceedings of the board shall be reduced to writing by the secretary of the board
and recorded in a well-bound book which shall be open for inspection by each director and the
public at all reasonable times. Copies of such proceedings when certified by the secretary of the
corporation under its seal shall be received in all courts as evidence of the matters and things
therein certified. The directors and officers of the corporation shall serve without compensation,
except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. Any director may be impeached and removed from office in the manner and on the same
grounds provided for in Section 175 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and the general
laws of the state for impeachment and removal of officers mentioned in said Section 175.
(c) The corporation shall have a president, a vice president, a secretary and a treasurer and such
other officers as the board shall deem necessary, but the office of secretary and treasurer may be
held by the same person. The president and vice president of the corporation shall be elected by
the board from the membership thereof; the secretary, the treasurer, and any other officer of the
corporation may, but need not, be a member of the board and shall also be elected by the board.
The officers of the board shall be elected at a regular meeting of the board to be held in the
month of January of each year, and once elected shall serve until their successor is chosen and
elected. The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the corporation shall also be the
president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the board, respectively.
(d) The corporation shall make to the governing body of the city of Jackson an annual written
report of its activities and of its plans for the future which report shall include a financial
operating statement and balance sheet prepared by the examiner of public accounts for the state
of Alabama or by a certified public accountant appointed by the corporation.
Section 6. A corporation organized and existing under the provisions of this amendment shall
have the following powers, together with all powers incident thereto or necessary for the
performance of those stated herein:
(a) To adopt and from time to time amend bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct
of its business;
(b) To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its pleasure;
(c) To maintain a principal office in the city of Jackson and sub-offices at such other places as its
board may designate in Clarke county;
(d) To sue and be sued in its own name, excepting actions in tort against the corporation;
(e) To construct, own, operate, lease, build, install, acquire, maintain, equip, use and control
marinas, ports, waterfront facilities, docks, wharves, piers, berths, quays, warehouses, loading
and unloading facilities, boat and barge docking facilities, fishing facilities, pavilions,
auditoriums, shops, stores, boat launching facilities, dry docks, canals, recreational facilities,
campgrounds, parking facilities, office and other commercial buildings, water systems, electrical
systems, gas and fuel oil pipelines and pumping stations, railroad lines and railway systems,
helicopter and airline landing and loading facilities, industrial and manufacturing sites, buildings
and facilities, coal and other solid fuel handling facilities, wood products manufacturing and
handling facilities, agriculture and farm commodity handling, storage and processing facilities,
drainage and sewage facilities, liquid and solid waste handling and disposal facilities, conveyor
systems, jetties, mooring facilities, and all necessary or convenient approaches, easements, roads,
streets and ways leading thereto or used in conjunction therewith; and specifically including
herein bridge and road relocation, and the construction, maintenance and operation of bridges,
tunnels, overpasses, underpasses, roads and sidewalks; and the construction, leasing, operation,
equipping, owning, using, controlling and maintaining of public terminal and transfer facilities,
flood control facilities, water and soil erosion facilities, railroad and highway bridge relocation
and construction and maintenance of the same and all other types of waterway facilities pursuant
to all state, county, local and federal laws and regulations relative to the operation and
maintenance of the Tombigbee river.
(f) To own, acquire, maintain and control easements, rights of way, streets, approaches, roads,
interests in land, including the fee simple title to real property, riparian rights, and mooring rights
necessary, useful or convenient in gaining access, entry or approach to waterways, rivers, canals
and streams, whether or not navigable and whether or not such easements, rights-of-way, streets,
approaches, roads, interests in land, riparian rights and mooring rights lead to property owned or
controlled by the corporation.
(g) To acquire, whether by purchase, construction, exchange, gift, lease or otherwise and to
improve, equip and furnish and to own and maintain or lease one or more projects or parts
thereof, including all real and personal properties and interests therein which its board may deem
necessary in connection therewith, regardless of whether or not any such project or projects shall
then be in existence;
(h) To acquire, receive, take, hold, lease or operate, whether by purchase, gift, devise or
otherwise, property of every description, whether real, personal or mixed, and to manage the
same and to improve or develop any undeveloped property owned, leased or controlled by it;
(i) To sell, convey, lease or grant options for such purposes, any or all of its projects or
properties, whenever its board shall find that such action is in the furtherance of the purposes for
which the corporation was organized;
(j) To exchange or donate any or all of its projects or properties or parts thereof whenever its
board shall find such action to be in furtherance of the purpose for which the corporation was
organized;
(k) To execute and deliver such contracts or instruments of writing and to take such action as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes for which the corporation was
organized or to exercise any power or authority granted herein;
(l) To lease or let any project or any part thereof to such tenant or tenants for such term or terms
at such compensation or rentals and subject to such provisions, limitations and conditions as its
board may approve;
(m) To furnish or supply upon any property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation to
any persons, machines, automobiles, and watercraft thereon, for reward or compensation, any
goods, commodities, safety and health care facilities, fire fighting and prevention facilities, and
services convenient or useful to the owners, operators and users of any watercraft, machines, and
automobiles, and to persons upon property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation,
including, but not limited to, food, lodging [,] shelter, lawful drinks, confections, oil, gasoline,
motors and watercraft, motor and watercraft parts and equipment, guard services, space in
buildings, space for buildings and structures, communication facilities, telephone systems, and
the services of mechanics, repairmen and technicians;
(n) To charge fees for admission to any of its properties;
(o) To borrow money on such terms as are acceptable to the corporation for any corporate
purpose and to execute and deliver its promissory note or notes and such other agreements as
may be reasonably necessary or required to consummate the loan and secure the payment of the
indebtedness;
(p) To sell, exchange and convey any of its properties that may have become obsolete or worn
out or that may no longer be needed or useful, subject to the approval of the directors of the
corporation;
(q) To procure and agree to the procurement of insurance or guarantees from the United States of
America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from any private insurance company, of the
payment of any bonds issued by the corporation, and to pay premiums or fees for any such
insurance or guarantees;
(r) To enter into contracts with, to accept aid, loans and grants from, to cooperate with, and to do
any and all things not specifically prohibited by this amendment, and other applicable laws of the
state that may be necessary in order to avail itself of the aid and cooperation of the United States
of America, the state, the county or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of either
thereof in furtherance of the purposes of the corporation;
(s) To appoint, employ, contract with and provide for compensation of such officers, employees
and agents, including engineers, attorneys, planning consultants, fiscal advisors, architects,
accountants, financial experts, fiscal agents, managers and such other advisors, consultants and
agents as may in its judgment be necessary or desirable as the business of the corporation may
require, including the power to fix working conditions by general rule or other conditions of
employment and at its option to provide a system of disability pay, retirement compensation and
pensions or any of them and to hire and fire servants, agents, employees and officers at will;
(t) To fix, establish, collect and alter landing fees, docking fees, tolls, rents and other charges for
the use of any facility or other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(u) To make and enforce rules and regulations governing the use of any property or facility or
other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(v) To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its property and other assets in such
amounts and from such insurers as its board may deem desirable;
(w) To enter into a management contract or contracts with any person, firm or corporation,
whether public or private, for the management, supervision or operation of all or any part of its
facilities as may in the judgment of the corporation be necessary or desirable in order to perform
more efficiently or economically any function for which it may become responsible in the
exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this amendment;
(x) To invest its monies [moneys] (including, without limitation, the monies held in any special
fund created pursuant to any trust indenture or agreement or resolution securing any of its bonds
or notes and proceeds from the sale of any of its bonds or notes) not required for immediate use
in:
(y) To issue its bonds for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers and to apply proceeds
from the sale of its bonds not only for payment of interest thereon prior to and during the
construction and equipment of any buildings, structures, facilities or other improvements being
financed thereby but also to pay bond discount, commissions or other financing charges, interest
on the obligations issued in evidence of such borrowing for such period as its board shall deem
advisable, fees and expenses of financial advisors and planning and management consultants, all
legal, accounting, publishing, printing, recording and filing fees and expenses and such other
expenses as shall be necessary or incident to such borrowing;
(z) To mortgage and pledge any or all of its projects or any part or parts thereof, as security for
the payment of the principal, interest and premium, if any, on any bonds so issued and any
agreements made in connection therewith, whether then owned or thereafter acquired, and to
pledge the revenues and receipts therefrom or from any thereof;
(aa) To exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in and subject to the
provisions of Act No. 85-548, S. 287, 1985 Regular Session (Acts 1985, p. 802), as amended;
(bb) To expend funds for the purchase or lease of materials, equipment, supplies or other
personal property without compliance with the provisions of the competitive bid laws then in
effect in the state of Alabama that might otherwise be applicable.
(cc) To lend upon such terms and conditions as its board may deem advisable, all or any portion
of the proceeds derived from the issuance of its bonds, notes or obligations to a user, whether
pursuant to one or more loan agreements or in conjunction with the lease or sale of one or more
facilities to such user or the purchase of any authorized purpose obligation relating to a facility or
facilities operated by such user, for one or more or any combination of the following purposes:
(dd) To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and to exercise its
powers pursuant to the provisions of this amendment.
Section 7. (a) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be payable solely out of the revenues and
receipts derived from the leasing or sale by the board of its projects or of any thereof as may be
designated in the proceedings of the board under which the bonds shall be authorized to be
issued.
(b) The principal of and interest on any bonds issued by the corporation shall be secured by a
pledge of the revenues and receipts out of which the same may be payable and may be secured
by a mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture conveying as security for such bonds all or any
part of the property of the corporation from which the revenues or receipts so pledged may be
derived. The resolution under which the bonds are authorized to be issued and any such mortgage
and deed of trust or trust indenture may contain any agreements and provisions respecting the
operation, maintenance and insurance of the property covered by said mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the use of the revenues and receipts subject to such mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues and receipts,
rights, duties and remedies of the parties to any such instrument and the parties for the benefit of
whom such instrument is made and the rights and remedies available in the event of default as
the board shall deem advisable and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this article.
Each pledge, agreement, mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made for the benefit or
security of any of the bonds of the corporation shall continue effective until the principal of and
interest on the bonds for the benefit of which the same were made shall have been fully paid. In
the event of default in such payment or in any agreements of the corporation made as a part of
the contract under which the bonds were issued, whether contained in the proceedings
authorizing the bonds or in any mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture executed as security
therefor, such default may be enforced by mandamus, the appointment of a receiver, or either of
said remedies, and foreclosure of such mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture may, if
provided for in said instrument, be had.
(c) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be signed by the president of its board and attested
by its secretary, and the seal of the corporation shall be affixed thereto, and any interest coupons
applicable to the bonds of the authority shall be signed by the chairman of its board; provided,
that a facsimile of the signature of one, but not both, of said officers may be printed or otherwise
reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of his manually signing the same, a facsimile of the seal of
the authority may be printed or otherwise reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of being
manually affixed thereof, and a facsimile of the signature of the president of the board may be
printed or otherwise reproduced on any such interest coupons in lieu of his manually signing the
same.
(d) Any such bonds may be executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time
to time, shall be in such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, shall contain
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or
rates of interest, payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its
board. Bonds of the corporation may be sold at either public or private sale in such manner and at
such price or prices and at such time or times as may be determined by the board to be most
advantageous. The corporation may pay all expenses, premiums and commissions in connection
with any financing done by it. All bonds, except bonds registered as to principal or as to both
principal and interest, and any interest coupons applicable thereto issued by the corporation shall
be construed to be negotiable instruments although payable solely from a specified source.
(e) All obligations created or assumed and all bonds issued or assumed by the corporation shall
be solely and exclusively an obligation of the corporation and shall not create an obligation or
debt of the state or of any county or municipality; provided that the provisions of this sentence
shall not be construed to release the original obligor from liability on any bond or other
obligation assumed by the corporation. Any bonds issued by the corporation shall be limited or
special obligations of the corporation payable solely out of the revenues and receipts of the
corporation specified in the proceedings authorizing those bonds.
(f) Bonds of a corporation are hereby made legal investments for executors, administrators,
trustees and other fiduciaries, unless otherwise directed by the court having jurisdiction of the
fiduciary relation or by the document that is the source of the fiduciary's authority, and for
savings banks and insurance companies organized under the laws of the state.
Section 8. All moneys derived from the sale of any bonds issued by the corporation shall be used
solely for the purpose or purposes for which the same are authorized, including, but without
limitation to, the use of bond proceeds to establish reserve funds as security for the payment of
the principal of (and premium, if any) and interest on the bonds, and any costs and expenses
incidental thereto. Such costs and expenses may include but shall not be limited to the fiscal,
engineering, legal and other expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of the bonds, and
except in the case of refunding bonds, interest to accrue on such bonds for a period ending not
later than two years from their date.
Section 9. Any bonds issued by the corporation may from time to time be refunded by the
issuance, by sale or exchange, of refunding bonds payable from the same or different sources for
the purpose of paying all or any part of the principal of the bonds to be refunded, any redemption
premium required to be paid as a condition to the redemption prior to maturity of any such bonds
that are to be so redeemed in connection with such refunding, any accrued and unpaid interest on
the bonds to be refunded, any interest to accrue on each bond to be refunded to the date on which
it is to be paid, whether at maturity or by redemption prior to maturity, and the expenses incurred
in connection with refunding; provided, that unless duly called for redemption pursuant to
provisions contained therein, the holders of any such bonds then outstanding and proposed to be
refunded shall not be compelled without their consent to surrender their outstanding bonds for
such refunding. Any refunding bonds may be sold by the corporation at public or private sale at
such price or prices as may be determined by its board to be most advantageous, or may be
exchanged for the bonds or other obligations to be refunded. Any such refunding bonds may be
executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time to time, shall be in such
form and denominations and have such tenor and maturities, shall contain such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or rates of interest,
payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its board.
Any refunding bonds issued by the corporation shall be issued and may be secured in accordance
with the provisions of section 7, hereof.
Section 10. Upon the adoption by the board of the corporation of any resolution providing for the
issuance of bonds, the corporation may, in its discretion, cause to be published once a week for
two consecutive weeks, in a newspaper published or having a general circulation in Clarke
county, a notice in substantially the following form (the blanks being properly filled in) at the
end of which shall be printed the name and title of either the president or secretary of such
corporation. " , a public corporation under the laws of the state of Alabama, on the   day of  ,
authorized the issuance of &dollar;  principal amount of bonds of the said public corporation for
purposes authorized in the act of the legislature of Alabama under which the said public
corporation was organized. Any action or proceeding questioning the validity of the said bonds,
or the pledge and the mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture to secure the same, or the
proceedings authorizing the same, must be commenced within thirty (30) days after the first
publication of this notice."
Any action or proceeding in any court to set aside or question the proceedings for the issuance of
the bonds referred to in said notice or to contest the validity of any such bonds, or the validity of
any pledge and mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made therefor, must be commenced
within 30 days after the first publication of such notice. After the expiration of the said period no
right of action or defense questioning or attacking the validity of the said proceedings or of the
said bonds or the said pledge or mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture shall be asserted,
nor shall the validity of the said proceedings, bonds, pledge, mortgage, and deed of trust or trust
indenture be open to question in any court on any ground whatsoever except in an action
commenced within such period.
Section 11. The corporation and all properties at any time owned by it and the income therefrom
and all bonds issued by it and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation in the state
of Alabama, including, without limitation, ad valorem, sales, excise, license and privilege taxes;
provided, however, this exemption shall not be construed to exempt concessionaires or lessees of
the authority from the payment of any taxes, including licenses, privileges, or sales taxes levied
by the state, county or any municipality. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation, the
certificate of dissolution, all deeds or other documents whereby properties are conveyed to the
corporation and all deeds, indentures or leases executed by the corporation may be filed for
record in the office of the judge of probate of Clarke county and, if necessary, in the office of the
secretary of state, without the payment of any tax or fees other than such fees as may be
authorized by law for the recording of such instrument.
Section 12. The city of Jackson shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal of
or interest on any bonds of the corporation or for the performance of any pledge, mortgage,
obligation or agreement of any kind whatsoever which may be undertaken by the corporation,
and none of the bonds of the corporation or any of its agreements or obligations shall be
construed to constitute an indebtedness of the city of Jackson within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory provision whatsoever.
Section 13. The corporation shall be exempt from the laws of the state of Alabama governing
usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates.
Section 14. The corporation shall be a nonprofit corporation and no part of its net earnings
remaining after payment of its expenses shall inure to the benefit of any individual, firm or
corporation, except that in the event a board shall determine that sufficient provision has been
made for the full payment of the expenses, bonds and other obligations of the corporation, then
any net earnings of the corporation thereafter accruing shall be paid to the city of Jackson.
Section 15. At any time when the corporation has no bonds or other obligations outstanding, its
board may adopt a resolution, which shall be duly entered upon its minutes, declaring that the
corporation shall be dissolved. Upon filing for record of a certified copy of the said resolution in
the office of the judge of probate of Clarke county, the corporation shall thereupon stand
dissolved and in the event it owned any property at the time of its dissolution, the title to all its
properties shall thereupon pass to the city of Jackson.
Section 16. The existence of a corporation incorporated under the provisions of this amendment
shall prevent the subsequent incorporation hereunder of another corporation pursuant to authority
granted to such corporation.
Section 17. The contracts of the corporation shall be executed in the name of the corporation by
the president of the corporation and attested by the secretary of the corporation. Except for bonds
it is not required that the seal be impressed or printed on contracts. It is further provided hereby
that, except for bonds, the corporation may provide by resolution for a different form for the
execution of contracts and for the execution thereof by an officer or agent other than the
president and secretary. But in no event shall a contract, irrespective of the form and of the
person executing the same, be binding unless such contract was authorized or ratified by the
corporation.
Section 18. Clarke county or any municipality within the county, is authorized, but not required,
to lease, sell, donate or otherwise convey to the corporation, real or personal property, including
park properties, without the necessity of authorization by election of the qualified voters of said
county, the municipality, and the governing body of said county or any municipality within the
county, and is hereby authorized to enter into any agreements which such corporation may deem
necessary in order to effectuate such lease, sale, donation, or transfer. The governing body of
Clarke county, or any municipality within the county, is further authorized to covenant with the
corporation, which covenant shall likewise constitute a contract with the holders of any revenue
bonds, notes or other obligations thereafter issued by the corporation, that it will not acquire,
construct or operate or permit the acquisition, construction or operation within the municipality
or county, of any facility in competition with the corporation so long as any of the bonds, notes
or other obligations of the corporation shall remain outstanding.
Section 19. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and become effective upon
the ratification of this amendment by the people.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 466 466.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 466 RATIFIED 1986
Elmore County Local Service Districts.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation,
organization, operation, administration, and financing of local districts within Elmore county as
public corporations to provide any one or more of the following local services: (a) fighting and
prevention of fires; (b) the operation of emergency medical services, including rescue and
ambulance service; authorize such district to fix and collect rates, fees and charges for such
services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property within such
district; authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance of bonds and other obligations by or
on behalf of such district; provided that Elmore county shall not be responsible for any such
bond or obligation and no such bond or obligation shall be chargeable against the limit on the
debt of Elmore county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 467 467.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 467 RATIFIED 1986
Annexation in Etowah County.
Any municipality that was not located wholly within the boundaries of Etowah county prior to
January 1, 1986, shall not annex any territory within Etowah county without the approval of the
electorate of said territory expressed in a vote on the issue of said annexation.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any municipality incorporated in the future
that lies entirely within the boundaries of Etowah county.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any territory presently annexed within
Etowah county by a municipality located outside of the county.
The legislature may pass local or general acts to supplement this amendment, so long as such
acts do not contravene the provisions of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 468 468.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 468 RATIFIED 1986
Industrial Development in Marengo County.
Any provision of the Constitution of Alabama or amendments thereto to the contrary
notwithstanding, the legislature by general or local law may authorize, provide for and regulate
the formation and operation in Marengo county of public corporations authorized to engage in
promoting the industrial development of Marengo county and the municipalities therein and
particularly the development and commercial use of the inland waterways in such county. Any
such law may prescribe the powers and authority of any corporation formed thereunder, which
may include, but shall not be limited to the following: the authority to acquire, construct, operate,
improve, and finance wharves, stocks, warehouses and other port and related facilities in
Marengo county; to apply for permission to operate a foreign trade zone and to establish, operate
and maintain such a zone; to exercise the power of eminent domain; to borrow money for any of
its corporate purposes and issue interest-bearing revenue bonds and other securities, but such
corporation shall not have authority to create a debt against the state, Marengo county or any
municipality or other political subdivision of Marengo county. The act may authorize Marengo
county or any municipality or other political subdivision, public corporation, agency or
instrumentality of Marengo county to aid and cooperate with the corporation authorized in the
act, and with or without consideration to transfer any port facilities or other property to any
corporation organized under such act. Such law may exempt any corporation organized pursuant
to it from some or all taxation by the state, Marengo county or any municipality in Marengo
county; from tort liability; and from the payment of certain fees of public officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 469 469.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 469 RATIFIED 1986
Annexation in Marshall County.
Any municipality that was not located wholly or in part within the boundaries of Marshall county
prior to January 1, 1986, shall not annex any territory within Marshall county without the
approval of the electorate of Marshall county expressed in a vote on the issue of said annexation,
or approved unanimously by the Marshall county commission after notice has been given.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any municipality incorporated in the future
that lies entirely within the boundaries of Marshall county.
The provisions of this amendment shall not apply to any territory presently annexed within
Marshall county by a municipality located outside of the county.
The legislature may pass local or general acts to supplement this amendment, so long as such
acts do not contravene the provisions of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 470 470.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 470 RATIFIED 1986
Washington County Port Authority.
Section 1. The governing body of Washington county, Alabama, is hereby authorized to declare
by the adoption of appropriate resolution, the need for the formation of a public corporation to
carry out the provisions of this act. Upon the adoption of such resolution the governing body of
Washington county shall appoint five persons, each of whom must be a duly qualified elector and
property owner in the said county, who shall form the board of directors of such corporation and
shall proceed to organize such corporation.
Section 2. (a) The certificate of incorporation shall set forth:
(b) The name designated for the corporation in the certificate of incorporation shall be one
indicating the purpose thereof, such as the "Washington County Port Authority" or some other
name of similar import.
(c) The certificate of incorporation shall be subscribed and acknowledged by each of the persons
forming the corporation before an officer or officers authorized by the laws of the state of
Alabama to take acknowledgements to deeds, and the certificate of incorporation shall have
attached thereto a certified copy of the resolution provided for in section 1, and a certificate by
the secretary of state that the name proposed for the corporation is not identical with that of any
other corporation in the state or so nearly similar thereto as to lead to confusion and uncertainty.
Section 3. The certificate of incorporation, when executed and acknowledged in conformity with
section 2, shall be filed with the judge of probate of Washington county and with the secretary of
state. The judge of probate shall thereupon examine the certificate of incorporation and, if he
finds that the recitals contained therein are correct, that the requirements of section 2 have been
complied with, and that the name is not identical with or so nearly similar to that of another
corporation already in existence in this state so as to lead to confusion and uncertainty, he shall
approve the certificate of incorporation and record it in an appropriate book or record in his
office and shall also file the certificate of incorporation with the secretary of state. When such
certificate is so filed, the corporation referred to therein shall come into existence and shall
constitute a public body corporate and politic, vested with the rights and powers herein granted.
Section 4. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation incorporated under the provisions of
this amendment may at any time and from time to time be amended in the manner provided in
this section. The board shall first adopt a resolution adopting an amendment to the certificate of
incorporation which shall be set forth in full in the said resolution and which amendment may
include any matters which might have been included in the original certificate of incorporation.
After the adoption of the resolution proposing an amendment to the certificate of incorporation of
the corporation by the board, the president and secretary of the board shall sign and file for
record in the office of the judge of probate in Washington county and in the office of the
secretary of state a certificate in the name of and in behalf of the corporation under its seal,
reciting the adoption of said resolution by the board. The judge of probate for Washington county
shall thereupon record such certificate in an appropriate book in his office. When such certificate
has been so filed and recorded, such amendment shall become effective, and the certificate of
incorporation shall thereupon be amended to the extent provided in the amendment.
Section 5. (a) The corporation shall have a board of directors in which all of the powers of the
corporation shall be vested pursuant to its authority, and which shall consist of five members.
The directors shall be elected by the governing body of Washington county for staggered terms
of office as follows: Two (2) years for the first appointee; three (3) years for the second
appointee; four (4) years for the third appointee; five (5) years for the fourth appointee; six (6)
years for the fifth appointee; and thereafter the term of office of each director shall be six (6)
years. If any director resigns or dies or becomes incapable of acting as a director or ceases to
reside in Washington county or is otherwise disqualified to act, the governing body of
Washington county shall elect a successor to serve for the unexpired term. Directors shall be
eligible for re-election to succeed themselves in office. If at the expiration of any term of office
of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of
office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until a successor shall be so elected. No
director shall be an officer or member of the governing body of Washington county.
(b) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but any meeting of such board may be adjourned from time to time by a majority of the
directors present or may be so adjourned by a single director if such director is the only director
present at such meeting. No vacancy in the membership of the board shall impair the right of a
quorum to exercise all the powers and duties of the authority. Any matter in which the board is
authorized to act may be acted upon at a regular, special or called meeting. At the request of any
director, the vote on any question before the board shall be taken by ayes and nays entered upon
the record. All proceedings of the board shall be reduced to writing by the secretary of the board
and recorded in a well-bound book which shall be open for inspection by each director and the
public at all reasonable times. Copies of such proceedings when certified by the secretary of the
corporation under its seal shall be received in all courts as evidence of the matters and things
therein certified. The directors and officers of the corporation shall serve without compensation,
except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. Any director may be impeached and removed from office in the manner and on the same
grounds provided for in Section 175 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and the general
laws of the state for impeachment and removal of officers mentioned in said Section 175.
(c) The corporation shall have a president, a vice president, a secretary and a treasurer and such
other officers as the board shall deem necessary, but the office of secretary and treasurer may be
held by the same person. The president and vice president of the corporation shall be elected by
the board from the membership thereof; the secretary, the treasurer, and any other officer of the
corporation may, but need not, be a member of the board and shall also be elected by the board.
The officers of the board shall be elected at a regular meeting of the board to be held in the
month of January of each year, and once elected shall serve until their successor is chosen and
elected. The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the corporation shall also be the
president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the board, respectively.
(d) The corporation shall make to the governing body of Washington county an annual written
report of its activities and of its plans for the future which report shall include a financial
operating statement and balance sheet prepared by the examiner of public accounts for the state
of Alabama or by a certified public accountant appointed by the corporation.
Section 6. A corporation organized and existing under the provisions of this amendment shall
have the following powers, together with all powers incident thereto or necessary for the
performance of those stated herein:
(a) To adopt and from time to time amend bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct
of its business;
(b) To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its pleasure;
(c) To maintain a principal office in Washington county and sub-offices at such other places as
its board may designate in Washington county;
(d) To sue and be sued in its own name, excepting actions in tort against the corporation;
(e) To construct, own, operate, lease, build, install, acquire, maintain, equip, use and control
marinas, ports, waterfront facilities, docks, wharves, piers, berths, quays, warehouses, loading
and unloading facilities, boat and barge docking facilities, fishing facilities, pavilions,
auditoriums, shops, stores, boat launching facilities, dry docks, canals, recreational facilities,
campgrounds, parking facilities, office and other commercial buildings, water systems, electrical
systems, gas and fuel oil pipelines and pumping stations, railroad lines and railway systems,
helicopter and airline landing and loading facilities, industrial and manufacturing sites, buildings
and facilities, coal and other solid fuel handling facilities, wood products manufacturing and
handling facilities, agriculture and farm commodity handling, storage and processing facilities,
drainage and sewage facilities, liquid and solid waste handling and disposal facilities, conveyor
systems, jetties, mooring facilities, and all necessary or convenient approaches, easements, roads,
streets and ways leading thereto or used in conjunction therewith; and specifically including
herein bridge and road relocation, and the construction, maintenance and operation of bridges,
tunnels, overpasses, underpasses, roads and sidewalks; and the construction, leasing, operation,
equipping, owning, using, controlling and maintaining of public terminal and transfer facilities,
flood control facilities, water and soil erosion facilities, railroad and highway bridge relocation
and construction and maintenance of the same and all other types of waterway facilities pursuant
to all state, county, local and federal laws and regulations relative to the operation and
maintenance of the Tombigbee river.
(f) To own, acquire, maintain and control easements, rights-of-way, streets, approaches, roads,
interests in land, including the fee simple title to real property, riparian rights, and mooring rights
necessary, useful or convenient in gaining access, entry or approach to waterways, rivers, canals
and streams, whether or not navigable and whether or not such easements, rights of way, streets,
approaches, roads, interests in land, riparian rights and mooring rights lead to property owned or
controlled by the corporation.
(g) To acquire, whether by purchase, construction, exchange, gift, lease or otherwise and to
improve, equip and furnish and to own and maintain or lease one or more projects or parts
thereof, including all real and personal properties and interests therein which its board may deem
necessary in connection therewith, regardless of whether or not any such project or projects shall
then be in existence;
(h) To acquire, receive, take, hold, lease or operate, whether by purchase, gift, devise or
otherwise, property of every description, whether real, personal or mixed, and to manage the
same and to improve or develop any undeveloped property owned, leased or controlled by it;
(i) To sell, convey, lease or grant options for such purposes, any or all of its projects or
properties, whenever its board shall find that such action is in the furtherance of the purposes for
which the corporation was organized;
(j) To exchange or donate any or all of its projects or properties or parts thereof whenever its
board shall find such action to be in furtherance of the purpose for which the corporation was
organized;
(k) To execute and deliver such contracts or instruments of writing and to take such action as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes for which the corporation was
organized or to exercise any power or authority granted herein;
(l) To lease or let any project or any part thereof to such tenant or tenants for such term or terms
at such compensation or rentals and subject to such provisions, limitations and conditions as its
board may approve;
(m) To furnish or supply upon any property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation to
any persons, machines, automobiles, and watercraft thereon, for reward or compensation, any
goods, commodities, safety and health care facilities, fire fighting and prevention facilities, and
services convenient or useful to the owners, operators and users of any watercraft, machines, and
automobiles, and to persons upon property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation,
including, but not limited to, food, lodging, shelter, lawful drinks, confections, oil, gasoline,
motors and watercraft, motor and watercraft parts and equipment, guard services, space in
buildings, space for buildings and structures, communication facilities, telephone systems, and
the services of mechanics, repairmen and technicians;
(n) To charge fees for admission to any of its properties;
(o) To borrow money on such terms as are acceptable to the corporation for any corporate
purpose and to execute and deliver its promissory note or notes and such other agreements as
may be reasonably necessary or required to consummate the loan and secure the payment of the
indebtedness;
(p) To sell, exchange and convey any of its properties that may have become obsolete or worn
out or that may no longer be needed or useful, subject to the approval of the directors of the
corporation;
(q) To procure and agree to the procurement of insurance or guarantees from the United States of
America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from any private insurance company, of the
payment of any bonds issued by the corporation, and to pay premiums or fees for any such
insurance or guarantees;
(r) To enter into contracts with, to accept aid, loans and grants from, to cooperate with, and to do
any and all things not specifically prohibited by this amendment, and other applicable laws of the
state that may be necessary in order to avail itself of the aid and cooperation of the United States
of America, the state, the county or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of either
thereof in furtherance of the purposes of the corporation;
(s) To appoint, employ, contract with and provide for compensation of such officers, employees
and agents, including engineers, attorneys, planning consultants, fiscal advisors, architects,
accountants, financial experts, fiscal agents, managers and such other advisors, consultants and
agents as may in its judgment be necessary or desirable as the business of the corporation may
require, including the power to fix working conditions by general rule or other conditions of
employment and at its option to provide a system of disability pay, retirement compensation and
pensions or any of them and to hire and fire servants, agents, employees and officers at will;
(t) To fix, establish, collect and alter landing fees, docking fees, tolls, rents and other charges for
the use of any facility or other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(u) To make and enforce rules and regulations governing the use of any property or facility or
other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(v) To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its property and other assets in such
amounts and from such insurers as its board may deem desirable;
(w) To enter into a management contract or contracts with any person, firm or corporation,
whether public or private, for the management, supervision or operation of all or any part of its
facilities as may in the judgment of the corporation be necessary or desirable in order to perform
more efficiently or economically any function for which it may become responsible in the
exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this amendment;
(x) To invest its monies [moneys] (including, without limitation, the monies [moneys] held in
any special fund created pursuant to any trust indenture or agreement or resolution securing any
of its bonds or notes and proceeds from the sale of any of its bonds or notes) not required for
immediate use in:
(y) To issue its bonds for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers and to apply proceeds
from the sale of its bonds not only for payment of interest thereon prior to and during the
construction and equipment of any buildings, structures, facilities or other improvements being
financed thereby but also to pay bond discount, commissions or other financing charges, interest
on the obligations issued in evidence of such borrowing for such period as its board shall deem
advisable, fees and expenses of financial advisors and planning and management consultants, all
legal, accounting, publishing, printing, recording and filing fees and expenses and such other
expenses as shall be necessary or incident to such borrowing;
(z) To mortgage and pledge any or all of its projects or any part or parts thereof, as security for
the payment of the principal, interest and premium, if any, on any bonds so issued and any
agreements made in connection therewith, whether then owned or thereafter acquired, and to
pledge the revenues and receipts therefrom or from any thereof;
(aa) To exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in and subject to the
provisions of Act No. 85-548, S. 287, 1985 Regular Session (Acts 1985, p. 802), as amended;
(bb) To expend funds for the purchase or lease of materials, equipment, supplies or other
personal property without compliance with the provisions of the competitive bid laws then in
effect in the state of Alabama that might otherwise be applicable;
(cc) To lend upon such terms and conditions as its board may deem advisable, all or any portion
of the proceeds derived from the issuance of its bonds, notes or obligations to a user, whether
pursuant to one or more loan agreements or in conjunction with the lease or sale of one or more
facilities to such user or the purchase of any authorized purpose obligation relating to a facility or
facilities operated by such user, for one or more or any combination of the following purposes:
(dd) To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and to exercise its
powers pursuant to the provisions of this amendment.
Section 7. (a) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be payable solely out of the revenues and
receipts derived from the leasing or sale by the board of its projects or of any thereof as may be
designated in the proceedings of the board under which the bonds shall be authorized to be
issued.
(b) The principal of and interest on any bonds issued by the corporation shall be secured by a
pledge of the revenues and receipts out of which the same may be payable and may be secured
by a mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture conveying as security for such bonds all or any
part of the property of the corporation from which the revenues or receipts so pledged may be
derived. The resolution under which the bonds are authorized to be issued and any such mortgage
and deed of trust or trust indenture may contain any agreements and provisions respecting the
operation, maintenance and insurance of the property covered by said mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the use of the revenues and receipts subject to such mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues and receipts,
rights, duties and remedies of the parties to any such instrument and the parties for the benefit of
whom such instrument is made and the rights and remedies available in the event of default as
the board shall deem advisable and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this article.
Each pledge, agreement, mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made for the benefit or
security of any of the bonds of the corporation shall continue effective until the principal of and
interest on the bonds for the benefit of which the same were made shall have been fully paid. In
the event of default in such payment or in any agreements of the corporation made as a part of
the contract under which the bonds were issued, whether contained in the proceedings
authorizing the bonds or in any mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture executed as security
therefor, such default may be enforced by mandamus, the appointment of a receiver, or either of
said remedies, and foreclosure of such mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture may, if
provided for in said instrument, be had.
(c) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be signed by the president of its board and attested
by its secretary, and the seal of the corporation shall be affixed thereto, and any interest coupons
applicable to the bonds of the authority shall be signed by the chairman of its board; provided,
that a facsimile of the signature of one, but not both, of said officers may be printed or otherwise
reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of his manually signing the same, a facsimile of the seal of
the authority may be printed or otherwise reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of being
manually affixed thereof, and a facsimile of the signature of the president of the board may be
printed or otherwise reproduced on any such interest coupons in lieu of his manually signing the
same.
(d) Any such bonds may be executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time
to time, shall be in such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, shall contain
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or
rates of interest, payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its
board. Bonds of the corporation may be sold at either public or private sale in such manner and at
such price or prices and at such time or times as may be determined by the board to be most
advantageous. The corporation may pay all expenses, premiums and commissions in connection
with any financing done by it. All bonds, except bonds registered as to principal or as to both
principal and interest, and any interest coupons applicable thereto issued by the corporation shall
be construed to be negotiable instruments although payable solely from a specified source.
(e) All obligations created or assumed and all bonds issued or assumed by the corporation shall
be solely and exclusively an obligation of the corporation and shall not create an obligation or
debt of the state or of any county or municipality; provided that the provisions of this sentence
shall not be construed to release the original obligor from liability on any bond or other
obligation assumed by the corporation. Any bonds issued by the corporation shall be limited or
special obligations of the corporation payable solely out of the revenues and receipts of the
corporation specified in the proceedings authorizing those bonds.
(f) Bonds of a corporation are hereby made legal investments for executors, administrators,
trustees and other fiduciaries, unless otherwise directed by the court having jurisdiction of the
fiduciary relation or by the document that is the source of the fiduciary's authority, and for
savings banks and insurance companies organized under the laws of the state.
Section 8. All moneys derived from the sale of any bonds issued by the corporation shall be used
solely for the purpose or purposes for which the same are authorized, including, but without
limitation to, the use of bond proceeds to establish reserve funds as security for the payment of
the principal of (and premium, if any) and interest on the bonds, and any costs and expenses
incidental thereto. Such costs and expenses may include but shall not be limited to the fiscal,
engineering, legal and other expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of the bonds, and
except in the case of refunding bonds, interest to accrue on such bonds for a period ending not
later than two years from their date.
Section 9. Any bonds issued by the corporation may from time to time be refunded by the
issuance, by sale or exchange, of refunding bonds payable from the same or different sources for
the purpose of paying all or any part of the principal of the bonds to be refunded, any redemption
premium required to be paid as a condition to the redemption prior to maturity of any such bonds
that are to be so redeemed in connection with such refunding, any accrued and unpaid interest on
the bonds to be refunded, any interest to accrue on each bond to be refunded to the date on which
it is to be paid, whether at maturity or by redemption prior to maturity, and the expenses incurred
in connection with refunding; provided, that unless duly called for redemption pursuant to
provisions contained therein, the holders of any such bonds then outstanding and proposed to be
refunded shall not be compelled without their consent to surrender their outstanding bonds for
such refunding. Any refunding bonds may be sold by the corporation at public or private sale at
such price or prices as may be determined by its board to be most advantageous, or may be
exchanged for the bonds or other obligations to be refunded. Any such refunding bonds may be
executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time to time, shall be in such
form and denominations and have such tenor and maturities, shall contain such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or rates of interest,
payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its board.
Any refunding bonds issued by the corporation shall be issued and may be secured in accordance
with the provisions of Section 7, hereof.
Section 10. Upon the adoption by the board of the corporation of any resolution providing for the
issuance of bonds, the corporation may, in its discretion, cause to be published once a week for
two consecutive weeks, in a newspaper published or having a general circulation in Washington
county, a notice in substantially the following form (the blanks being properly filled in) at the
end of which shall be printed the name and title of either the president or secretary of such
corporation. " , a public corporation under the laws of the state of Alabama, on the   day of ,
authorized the issuance of &dollar;  principal amount of bonds of the said public corporation for
purposes authorized in the act of the legislature of Alabama under which the said public
corporation was organized. Any action or proceeding questioning the validity of the said bonds,
or the pledge and the mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture to secure the same, or the
proceedings authorizing the same, must be commenced within thirty (30) days after the first
publication of this notice".
Any action or proceeding in any court to set aside or question the proceedings for the issuance of
the bonds referred to in said notice or to contest the validity of any such bonds, or the validity of
any pledge and mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made therefor, must be commenced
within 30 days after the first publication of such notice. After the expiration of the said period no
right of action or defense questioning or attacking the validity of the said proceedings or of the
said bonds or the said pledge or mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture shall be asserted,
nor shall the validity of the said proceedings, bonds, pledge, mortgage, and deed of trust or trust
indenture be open to question in any court on any ground whatsoever except in an action
commenced within such period.
Section 11. The corporation and all properties at any time owned by it and the income therefrom
and all bonds issued by it and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation in the state
of Alabama, including, without limitation, ad valorem, sales, excise, license and privilege taxes;
provided, however, this exemption shall not be construed to exempt concessionaires or lessees of
the authority from the payment of any taxes, including licenses, privileges, or sales taxes levied
by the state, county or any municipality. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation, the
certificate of dissolution, all deeds or other documents whereby properties are conveyed to the
corporation and all deeds, indentures or leases executed by the corporation may be filed for
record in the office of the judge of probate of Washington county and, if necessary, in the office
of the secretary of state, without the payment of any tax or fees other than such fees as may be
authorized by law for the recording of such instrument.
Section 12. Washington county shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal
of or interest on any bonds of the corporation or for the performance of any pledge, mortgage,
obligation or agreement of any kind whatsoever which may be undertaken by the corporation,
and none of the bonds of the corporation or any of its agreements or obligations shall be
construed to constitute an indebtedness of Washington county within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory provision whatsoever.
Section 13. The corporation shall be exempt from the laws of the state of Alabama governing
usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates.
Section 14. The corporation shall be a nonprofit corporation and no part of its net earnings
remaining after payment of its expenses shall inure to the benefit of any individual, firm or
corporation, except that in the event a board shall determine that sufficient provision has been
made for the full payment of the expenses, bonds and other obligations of the corporation, then
any net earnings of the corporation thereafter accruing shall be paid to Washington county.
Section 15. At any time when the corporation has no bonds or other obligations outstanding, its
board may adopt a resolution, which shall be duly entered upon its minutes, declaring that the
corporation shall be dissolved. Upon filing for record of a certified copy of the said resolution in
the office of the judge of probate of Washington county, the corporation shall thereupon stand
dissolved and in the event it owned any property at the time of its dissolution, the title to all its
properties shall thereupon pass to Washington county.
Section 16. The existence of a corporation incorporated under the provisions of this amendment
shall prevent the subsequent incorporation hereunder of another corporation pursuant to authority
granted to such corporation.
Section 17. The contracts of the corporation shall be executed in the name of the corporation by
the president of the corporation and attested by the secretary of the corporation. Except for bonds
it is not required that the seal be impressed or printed on contracts. It is further provided hereby
that, except for bonds, the corporation may provide by resolution for a different form for the
execution of contracts and for the execution thereof by an officer or agent other than the
president and secretary. But in no event shall a contract, irrespective of the form and of the
person executing the same, be binding unless such contract was authorized or ratified by the
corporation.
Section 18. Washington county or any municipality within the county, is authorized, but not
required, to lease, sell, donate or otherwise convey to the corporation, real or personal property,
including park properties, without the necessity of authorization by election of the qualified
voters of said county, the municipality, and the governing body of said county or any
municipality within the county, and is hereby authorized to enter into any agreements which such
corporation may deem necessary in order to effectuate such lease, sale, donation, or transfer. The
governing body of Washington county, or any municipality within the county, is further
authorized to covenant with the corporation, which covenant shall likewise constitute a contract
with the holders of any revenue bonds, notes or other obligations thereafter issued by the
corporation, that it will not acquire, construct or operate or permit the acquisition, construction or
operation within the municipality or county, of any facility in competition with the corporation
so long as any of the bonds, notes or other obligation of the corporation shall remain outstanding.
Section 19. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and become effective upon
the ratification of this amendment by the people.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 471 471.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1986 ***

AMENDMENT 471 RATIFIED 1986
Special District Tax for Public Hospital Purposes in Baldwin County.
The special district tax now levied and collected for public hospital purposes in election precincts
numbered one through seven of Baldwin county, Alabama, and authorized by law shall be
continued upon approval of this constitutional amendment and by simultaneous approval of a
majority of the qualified electors in election precincts one through seven of Baldwin county
voting thereon in the constitutional election submitting this proposed amendment to the county
electorate.
Upon such approval, the governing body of Baldwin county shall levy and cause to be collected
annually, beginning October 1, 1987, for a period of 20 years, in addition to any taxes now
authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a
special district tax of two mills on each one dollar ($1.00) assessed valuation of taxable property
in election precincts numbered one through seven of Baldwin county, Alabama, to be used
exclusively for public hospital purposes (as the term "public hospital purposes" is defined in
amendment LXXVI [76] to the Alabama Constitution of 1901 proposed by Acts of 1949, page
897, submitted December 13, 1949, and proclaimed ratified December 21, 1949) within said
election precincts numbered one through seven.
Whenever such tax shall have been authorized by vote of such qualified electors, and levied by
the governing body of Baldwin county, such governing body may anticipate the proceeds
therefrom for any one or more of the purposes for which the tax shall have been voted, by
issuing, without further election, interest bearing tax anticipation bonds, warrants, or certificates
of indebtedness of said county payable solely from and secured by a pledge of a sufficient
amount of the annual proceeds from said tax received by the county.
The governing body of Baldwin county shall have power to designate as the agency of the
county, to construct, acquire, equip, operate and maintain public hospital facilities for said
election precincts numbered one through seven any public corporation heretofore or hereafter
organized for hospital purposes in the county. When a public corporation shall have been so
designated, the proceeds of said tax thereafter collected shall be paid to it and shall be used by it
for any one or more of the purposes for which the tax shall have been voted; provided, that
payments of the proceeds of said tax to said public corporation shall be made only to such extent
as will not result in the impairment of the obligation of any contract theretofore made with
respect to said tax. Said public corporation may anticipate the proceeds from said tax so required
to be paid to it by issuing, for any one or more of the purposes for which the tax shall have been
voted, the bonds, warrants, or certificates of indebtedness of said corporation, and may pledge for
the payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon a sufficient amount of the annual
proceeds from said tax so paid to it.
No securities issued or contracts made by Baldwin county under the authority of this amendment,
which are payable solely out of the proceeds of said tax, and no securities issued or contracts
made by any such public corporation, whether or not issued or made under the authority of this
amendment, shall be construed to be bonds of Baldwin county or of a political subdivision
thereof within the meaning of section 222 of the Constitution, or construed to create or constitute
an indebtedness of the county within the meaning of section 224 of the Constitution. Said
securities shall be construed to be negotiable instruments notwithstanding the fact that they may
be payable solely from a limited source. All pledges of said tax and all contracts made with
respect thereto pursuant to the provisions of this amendment shall take precedence in the order in
which they are made and shall create a charge on the proceeds of said tax prior to the expenses of
operating and maintaining any public hospital facilities.
As used in this act, the term "election precincts" means the election precincts or beats of the
county as they existed on July 27, 1965.
This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 472 472.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1987 ***

AMENDMENT 472 RATIFIED 1987
Use of Assets of State Retirement Systems.
All of the assets, proceeds or income of the teachers', employees', state police, public and judicial
retirement systems of Alabama, or any successor systems thereto, and all contributions and
payments made to such systems to provide for retirement and related benefits thereunder, shall
be held, invested as authorized by law, or disbursed as in trust for the exclusive purpose of
providing for such benefits, refunds and administrative expenses under the management of the
boards of control of the aforementioned retirement systems; and, none of such assets, proceeds,
income, contributions or payments shall be used, loaned, encumbered or diverted to or for any
other purpose whatsoever.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 473 232.0 012.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 473 RATIFIED 1987
Amendment of Section 232.
SECTION 232
Foreign corporations doing business in state.
No foreign corporation shall do business in this state without having at least one known place of
business and an authorized agent or agents therein, and without filing with the secretary of state a
certified copy of its articles of incorporation or association. Any foreign corporation, whether or
not such corporation has qualified to do business in this state by filing with the secretary of state
a certified copy of its articles of incorporation or association, may be sued only in those counties
where such suit would be allowed if the said foreign corporation were a domestic corporation.
The legislature shall, by general law, provide for the payment to the state of Alabama of a
franchise tax by such corporation, but such franchise tax shall be based on the actual amount of
capital employed in this state. Strictly benevolent, educational, or religious corporations shall not
be required to pay such a tax.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 474 474.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 474 RATIFIED 1988
Effectiveness of Laws Providing for Expenditure of County Funds.
No law, whether general, special or local, whose purpose or effect is to provide for a new or
increased expenditure of county funds held or disbursed by the county governing body shall
become effective as to any county of this state until the first day of the fiscal year next following
the passage of such law. The foregoing notwithstanding, a law, whether general, special or local,
whose purpose or effect is to provide for a new or increased expenditure of county funds held or
disbursed by the county governing body, shall become effective according to its own terms as
any other law if: (1) such law is approved by a resolution duly adopted by and spread upon the
minutes of the county governing body of the county affected thereby; or (2) such law (or other
law or laws which specifically refer to such law) provides the respective county governing bodies
with new or additional revenues sufficient to fund such new or increased expenditures.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 475 475.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 475 RATIFIED 1988
Tax Increment Districts in Counties and Municipalities.
Any other provision of the Constitution heretofore adopted to the contrary notwithstanding, the
legislature is hereby authorized to enact legislation permitting municipalities and counties to
establish tax increment districts, as may be defined in such legislation; to authorize the payment
to any such municipality or county of the increase in ad valorem taxes resulting from the
redevelopment or revitalization of any such district except to the extent that any such payment
would jeopardize the payment of any bonded indebtedness secured by any tax applicable in the
proposed district; and subject to the mutual agreement of the municipality and county affected
thereby to provide that all such increases in ad valorem taxes shall be payable to such
municipality or county until the indebtedness or costs incurred for any project have been paid in
full; to provide that public moneys, including the proceeds of obligations issued by the
municipality or county for such purposes, may be expended for the acquisition of property and
the redevelopment, rehabilitation or conservation thereof which may be disposed of to or for the
benefit of private interest for compensation established by the governing body of county or
municipality, as the case may be which established such district, but for not less than the fair
market value thereof determined by one or more independent appraisals of such property; and to
provide that any such obligations shall not be chargeable against the constitutional debt limit of
the issuer unless such obligations shall be general obligations of the issuer in addition to being
payable from such increases in property taxes. Any legislation passed at the same session of the
legislature at which this amendment is proposed, which shall be in furtherance of or in
implementation of the authority hereby granted is hereby validated and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 476 476.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 476 RATIFIED 1988
Chambers County Fire and Rescue Fund.
The Chambers county commission shall establish a Chambers county fire and rescue fund. The
circuit clerk of Chambers county shall assess an additional court charge against all persons
convicted in Chambers county of violating state criminal law regarding driving under the
influence of alcohol or the state criminal law regarding controlled substances. First time
offenders of said criminal law shall pay a court charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Second
time offenders of said criminal law shall pay a court charge of fifty dollars ($50.00). Third time
offenders and all other offenders of said criminal law shall pay a court charge of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). Said court charge shall be in addition to all other charges prescribed by law.
Said court charges shall be paid into the Chambers county fire and rescue fund and shall be
distributed by the county commission on January 31 of each year. Said money shall be equally
distributed to all chartered volunteer fire departments and chartered volunteer rescue squads
established in Chambers county. The Chambers county commission shall be authorized to
promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this amendment. The legislature
shall be authorized to enact general, local or special laws to provide further for the operation of
said fund, the allocation of the moneys placed in said fund and the amount of court charges
levied.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 477 465.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 477 RATIFIED 1988
Amendment of Amendment No. 465.
City of Jackson Port Authority.
Section 1. The governing body of the city of Jackson, Clarke county, Alabama, is hereby
authorized to declare by the adoption of appropriate resolution, the need for the formation of a
public corporation to carry out the provisions of this act. Upon the adoption of such resolution
the governing body of the city of Jackson shall appoint five persons, each of whom must be a
duly qualified elector and property owner in the said city of Jackson, who shall form the board of
directors of such corporation and shall proceed to organize such corporation.
Section 2. (a) The certificate of incorporation shall set forth:
(b) The name designated for the corporation in the certificate of incorporation shall be one
indicating the purpose thereof, such as the "city of Jackson port authority" or some other name of
similar import.
(c) The certificate of incorporation shall be subscribed and acknowledged by each of the persons
forming the corporation before an officer or officers authorized by the laws of the state of
Alabama to take acknowledgements to deeds, and the certificate of incorporation shall have
attached thereto a certified copy of the resolution provided for in section 1, and a certificate by
the secretary of state that the name proposed for the corporation is not identical with that of any
other corporation in the state or so nearly similar thereto as to lead to confusion and uncertainty.
Section 3. The certificate of incorporation, when executed and acknowledged in conformity with
section 2, shall be filed with the judge of probate of Clarke county and with the secretary of state.
The judge of probate shall thereupon examine the certificate of incorporation and, if he finds that
the recitals contained therein are correct, that the requirements of section 2 have been complied
with, and that the name is not identical with or so nearly similar to that of another corporation
already in existence in this state so as to lead to confusion and uncertainty, he shall approve the
certificate of incorporation and record it in an appropriate book or record in his office and shall
also file the certificate of incorporation with the secretary of state. When such certificate is so
filed, the corporation referred to therein shall come into existence and shall constitute a public
body corporate and politic, vested with the rights and powers herein granted.
Section 4. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation incorporated under the provisions of
this amendment may at any time and from time to time be amended in the manner provided in
this section. The board shall first adopt a resolution adopting an amendment to the certificate of
incorporation which shall be set forth in full in the said resolution and which amendment may
include any matters which might have been included in the original certificate of incorporation.
After the adoption of the resolution proposing an amendment to the certificate of incorporation of
the corporation by the board, the president and secretary of the board shall sign and file for record
in the office of the judge of probate in Clarke county and in the office of the secretary of state a
certificate in the name of and in behalf of the corporation under its seal, reciting the adoption of
said resolution by the board. The judge of probate for Clarke county shall thereupon record such
certificate in an appropriate book in his office. When such certificate has been so filed and
recorded, such amendment shall become effective, and the certificate of incorporation shall
thereupon be amended to the extent provided in the amendment.
Section 5. (a) The corporation shall have a board of directors in which all of the powers of the
corporation shall be vested pursuant to its authority, and which shall consist of five members.
The directors shall be appointed by the governing body of the city of Jackson; the places on the
board shall be numbered from one through five as follows, and the terms of office of the
directors shall be staggered, and, to that end, the initial terms of office of the initial directors shall
be as follows: Two (2) years as to Place One; three (3) years as to Place Two; four (4) years as to
Place Three; five (5) years as to Place Four; and six (6) years as to Place Five. After the initial
terms as to each such place on the board, the terms of office as to that place shall be four (4)
years. Only members of the city council of the city of Jackson, then serving as such, shall be
eligible for appointment to and, except as hereinafter shown, may serve in Place Three on said
board. If any director resigns or dies or becomes incapable of acting as a director or ceases to
reside in the city of Jackson or is otherwise disqualified to act, the governing body of the city of
Jackson shall appoint a successor to serve for the unexpired term. Directors shall be eligible for
reappointment to succeed themselves in office, if they are otherwise qualified to serve. If at the
expiration of any term of office of any director, or, if the director serving in Place Three ceases to
be a member of the city council of the city of Jackson, and a successor to such director shall not
have been appointed, then and in either such event such director shall nevertheless continue to
hold such office until a qualified successor has been appointed.
(b) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business, but any meeting of such board may be adjourned from time to time by a majority of the
directors present or may be so adjourned by a single director if such director is the only director
present at such meeting. No vacancy in the membership of the board shall impair the right of a
quorum to exercise all the powers and duties of the authority. Any matter in which the board is
authorized to act may be acted upon at a regular, special or called meeting. At the request of any
director, the vote on any question before the board shall be taken by ayes and nays entered upon
the record. All proceedings of the board shall be reduced to writing by the secretary of the board
and recorded in a well-bound book which shall be open for inspection by each director and the
public at all reasonable times. Copies of such proceedings when certified by the secretary of the
corporation under its seal shall be received in all courts as evidence of the matters and things
therein certified. The directors and officers of the corporation shall serve without compensation,
except that they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. Any director may be impeached and removed from office in the manner and on the same
grounds provided for in Section 175 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and the general
laws of the state for impeachment and removal of officers mentioned in said Section 175.
(c) The corporation shall have a president, a vice president, a secretary and a treasurer and such
other officers as the board shall deem necessary, but the office of secretary and treasurer may be
held by the same person. The president and vice president of the corporation shall be elected by
the board from the membership thereof; the secretary, the treasurer, and any other officer of the
corporation may, but need not, be a member of the board and shall also be elected by the board.
The officers of the board shall be elected at a regular meeting of the board to be held in the
month of January of each year, and once elected shall serve until their successor is chosen and
elected. The president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the corporation shall also be the
president, vice president, secretary and treasurer of the board, respectively.
(d) The corporation shall make to the governing body of the city of Jackson an annual written
report of its activities and of its plans for the future which report shall include a financial
operating statement and balance sheet prepared by the examiner of public accounts for the state
of Alabama or by a certified public accountant appointed by the corporation.
Section 6. A corporation organized and existing under the provisions of this amendment shall
have the following powers, together with all powers incident thereto or necessary for the
performance of those stated herein:
(a) To adopt and from time to time amend bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct
of its business;
(b) To adopt an official seal and alter the same at its pleasure;
(c) To maintain a principal office in the city of Jackson;
(d) To sue and be sued in its own name, excepting actions in tort against the corporation;
(e) To construct, own, operate, lease, build, install, acquire, maintain, equip, use and control
marinas, ports, waterfront facilities, docks, wharves, piers, berths, quays, warehouses, loading
and unloading facilities, boat and barge docking facilities, fishing facilities, pavilions,
auditoriums, shops, stores, boat launching facilities, dry docks, canals, recreational facilities,
campgrounds, parking facilities, office and other commercial buildings, water systems, electrical
systems, gas and fuel oil pipelines and pumping stations, railroad lines and railway systems,
helicopter and airline landing and loading facilities, industrial and manufacturing sites, buildings
and facilities, coal and other solid fuel handling facilities, wood products manufacturing and
handling facilities, agriculture and farm commodity handling, storage and processing facilities,
drainage and sewage facilities, liquid and solid waste handling and disposal facilities, conveyor
systems, jetties, mooring facilities, and all necessary or convenient approaches, easements, roads,
streets and ways leading thereto or used in conjunction therewith; and specifically including
herein bridge and road relocation, and the construction, maintenance and operation of bridges,
tunnels, overpasses, underpasses, roads and sidewalks; and the construction, leasing, operation,
equipping, owning, using, controlling and maintaining of public terminal and transfer facilities,
flood control facilities, water and soil erosion facilities, railroad and highway bridge relocation
and construction and maintenance of the same and all other types of waterway facilities pursuant
to all state, county, local and federal laws and regulations relative to the operation and
maintenance of the Tombigbee river;
(f) To own, acquire, maintain and control easements, rights of way, streets, approaches, roads,
interests in land, including the fee simple title to real property, riparian rights, and mooring rights
necessary, useful or convenient in gaining access, entry or approach to waterways, rivers, canals
and streams, whether or not navigable and whether or not such easements, rights of way, streets,
approaches, roads, interests in land, riparian rights and mooring rights lead to property owned or
controlled by the corporation;
(g) To acquire, whether by purchase, construction, exchange, gift, lease or otherwise and to
improve, equip and furnish and to own and maintain or lease one or more projects or parts
thereof, including all real and personal properties and interests therein which its board may deem
necessary in connection therewith, regardless of whether or not any such project or projects shall
then be in existence;
(h) To acquire, receive, take, hold, lease or operate, whether by purchase, gift, devise or
otherwise, property of every description, whether real, personal or mixed, and to manage the
same and to improve or develop any undeveloped property owned, leased or controlled by it;
(i) To sell, convey, lease or grant options for such purposes, any or all of its projects or
properties, whenever its board shall find that such action is in the furtherance of the purposes for
which the corporation was organized;
(j) To exchange or donate any or all of its projects or properties or parts thereof whenever its
board shall find such action to be in furtherance of the purpose for which the corporation was
organized;
(k) To execute and deliver such contracts or instruments of writing and to take such action as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes for which the corporation was
organized or to exercise any power or authority granted herein;
(l) To lease or let any project or any part thereof to such tenant or tenants for such term or terms
at such compensation or rentals and subject to such provisions;
(m) To furnish or supply upon any property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation to any
persons, machines, automobiles, and watercraft thereon, for reward or compensation, any goods,
commodities, safety and health care facilities, fire-fighting and prevention facilities, and services
convenient or useful to the owners, operators and users of any watercraft, machines, and
automobiles, and to persons upon property owned, leased or controlled by the corporation,
including, but not limited to, food, lodging, shelter, lawful drinks, confections, oil, gasoline,
motors and watercraft, motor and watercraft parts and equipment, guard services, space in
buildings, space for buildings and structures, communication facilities, telephone systems, and
the services of mechanics, repairmen and technicians;
(n) To charge fees for admission to any of its properties;
(o) To borrow money on such terms as are acceptable to the corporation for any corporate
purpose and to execute and deliver its promissory note or notes and such other agreements as
may be reasonably necessary or required to consummate the loan and secure the payment of the
indebtedness;
(p) To sell, exchange and convey any of its properties that may have become obsolete or worn
out or that may no longer be needed or useful, subject to the approval of the directors of the
corporation;
(q) To procure and agree to the procurement of insurance or guarantees from the United States of
America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or from any private insurance company, of the
payment of any bonds issued by the corporation, and to pay premiums or fees for any such
insurance or guarantees;
(r) To enter into contracts with, to accept aid, loans and grants from, to cooperate with, and to do
any and all things not specifically prohibited by this amendment, and other applicable laws of the
state that may be necessary in order to avail itself of the aid and cooperation of the United States
of America, the state, the county or any agency, instrumentality or political subdivision of either
thereof in furtherance of the purposes of the corporation;
(s) To appoint, employ, contract with and provide for compensation of such officers, employees
and agents, including engineers, attorneys, planning consultants, fiscal advisors, architects,
accountants, financial experts, fiscal agents, managers and such other advisors, consultants and
agents as may in its judgment be necessary or desirable as the business of the corporation may
require, including the power to fix working conditions by general rule or other conditions of
employment and at its option to provide a system of disability pay, retirement compensation and
pensions or any of them and to hire and fire servants, agents, employees and officers at will;
(t) To fix, establish, collect and alter landing fees, docking fees, tolls, rents and other charges for
the use of any facility or other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(u) To make and enforce rules and regulations governing the use of any property or facility or
other property owned or controlled by the corporation;
(v) To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its property and other assets in such
amounts and from such insurers as its board may deem desirable;
(w) To enter into a management contract or contracts with any person, firm or corporation,
whether public or private, for the management, supervision or operation of all or any part of its
facilities as may in the judgment of the corporation be necessary or desirable in order to perform
more efficiently or economically any function for which it may become responsible in the
exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this amendment;
(x) To invest its monies (including, without limitation, the monies held in any special fund
created pursuant to any trust indenture or agreement or resolution securing any of its bonds or
notes and proceeds from the sale of any of its bonds or notes) not required for immediate use in:
(y) To issue its bonds for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers and to apply proceeds
from the sale of its bonds not only for payment of interest thereon prior to and during the
construction and equipment of any buildings, structures, facilities or other improvements being
financed thereby but also to pay bond discount, commissions or other financing charges, interest
on the obligations issued in evidence of such borrowing for such period as its board shall deem
advisable, fees and expenses of financial advisors and planning and management consultants, all
legal, accounting, publishing, printing, recording and filing fees and expenses and such other
expenses as shall be necessary or incident to such borrowing;
(z) To mortgage and pledge any or all of its projects or any part or parts thereof, as security for
the payment of the principal, interest and premium, if any, on any bonds so issued and any
agreements made in connection therewith, whether then owned or thereafter acquired, and to
pledge the revenues and receipts therefrom or from any thereof;
(aa) To exercise the power of eminent domain in the manner provided in and subject to the
provisions of Act No. 85-548, S. 287, 1985 Regular Session (Acts 1985, p. 802), as amended;
(bb) To expend funds for the purchase or lease of materials, equipment, supplies or other
personal property without compliance with the provisions of the competitive bid laws then in
effect in the state of Alabama that might otherwise be applicable;
(cc) To lend upon such terms and conditions as its board may deem advisable, all or any portion
of the proceeds derived from the issuance of its bonds, notes or obligations to a user, whether
pursuant to one or more loan agreements or in conjunction with the lease or sale of one or more
facilities to such user or the purchase of any authorized purpose obligation relating to a facility or
facilities operated by such user, for one or more or any combination of the following purposes:
(dd) To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its purposes and to exercise its
powers pursuant to the provisions of this amendment.
Provided however, the powers specified in subsections (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (m), (n), (t),
(u), and (aa) of this section shall be granted and enforceable only within the city of Jackson and
the police jurisdiction of the city of Jackson as said police jurisdiction exists on the date this
constitutional amendment is ratified.
Section 7. (a) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be payable solely out of the revenues and
receipts derived from the leasing or sale by the board of its projects or of any thereof as may be
designated in the proceedings of the board under which the bonds shall be authorized to be
issued.
(b) The principal of and interest on any bonds issued by the corporation shall be secured by a
pledge of the revenues and receipts out of which the same may be payable and may be secured by
a mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture conveying as security for such bonds all or any
part of the property of the corporation from which the revenues or receipts so pledged may be
derived. The resolution under which the bonds are authorized to be issued and any such mortgage
and deed of trust or trust indenture may contain any agreements and provisions respecting the
operation, maintenance and insurance of the property covered by said mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the use of the revenues and receipts subject to such mortgage and deed of trust
or trust indenture, the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues and receipts,
rights, duties and remedies of the parties to any such instrument and the parties for the benefit of
whom such instrument is made and the rights and remedies available in the event of default as
the board shall deem advisable and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this article.
Each pledge, agreement, mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made for the benefit or
security of any of the bonds of the corporation shall continue effective until the principal of and
interest on the bonds for the benefit of which the same were made shall have been fully paid. In
the event of default in such payment or in any agreements of the corporation made as a part of the
contract under which the bonds were issued, whether contained in the proceedings authorizing
the bonds or in any mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture executed as security therefor,
such default may be enforced by mandamus, the appointment of a receiver, or either of said
remedies, and foreclosure of such mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture may, if provided
for in said instrument, be had.
(c) All bonds issued by the corporation shall be signed by the president of its board and attested
by its secretary, and the seal of the corporation shall be affixed thereto, and any interest coupons
applicable to the bonds of the authority shall be signed by the chairman of its board; provided,
that a facsimile of the signature of one, but not both, of said officers may be printed or otherwise
reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of his manually signing the same, a facsimile of the seal of
the authority may be printed or otherwise reproduced on any such bonds in lieu of being
manually affixed thereof, and a facsimile of the signature of the president of the board may be
printed or otherwise reproduced on any such interest coupons in lieu of his manually signing the
same.
(d) Any such bonds may be executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time
to time, shall be in such form and denominations and of such tenor and maturities, shall contain
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or
rates of interest, payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its
board. Bonds of the corporation may be sold at either public or private sale in such manner and at
such price or prices and at such time or times as may be determined by the board to be most
advantageous. The corporation may pay all expenses, premiums and commissions in connection
with any financing done by it. All bonds, except bonds registered as to principal or as to both
principal and interest, and any interest coupons applicable thereto issued by the corporation shall
be construed to be negotiable instruments although payable solely from a specified source.
(e) All obligations created or assumed and all bonds issued or assumed by the corporation shall
be solely and exclusively an obligation of the corporation and shall not create an obligation or
debt of the state or of any county or municipality; provided that the provisions of this sentence
shall not be construed to release the original obligor from liability on any bond or other
obligation assumed by the corporation. Any bonds issued by the corporation shall be limited or
special obligations of the corporation payable solely out of the revenues and receipts of the
corporation specified in the proceedings authorizing those bonds.
(f) Bonds of a corporation are hereby made legal investments for executors, administrators,
trustees and other fiduciaries, unless otherwise directed by the court having jurisdiction of the
fiduciary relation or by the document that is the source of the fiduciary's authority, and for
savings banks and insurance companies organized under the laws of the state.
Section 8. All moneys derived from the sale of any bonds issued by the corporation shall be used
solely for the purpose or purposes for which the same are authorized, including, but without
limitation to, the use of bond proceeds to establish reserve funds as security for the payment of
the principal of (and premium, if any) and interest on the bonds, and any costs and expenses
incidental thereto. Such costs and expenses may include but shall not be limited to the fiscal,
engineering, legal and other expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of the bonds, and
except in the case of refunding bonds, interest to accrue on such bonds for a period ending not
later than two years from their date.
Section 9. Any bonds issued by the corporation may from time to time be refunded by the
issuance, by sale or exchange, of refunding bonds payable from the same or different sources for
the purpose of paying all or any part of the principal of the bonds to be refunded, any redemption
premium required to be paid as a condition to the redemption prior to maturity of any such bonds
that are to be so redeemed in connection with such refunding, any accrued and unpaid interest on
the bonds to be refunded, any interest to accrue on each bond to be refunded to the date on which
it is to be paid, whether at maturity or by redemption prior to maturity, and the expenses incurred
in connection with refunding; provided, that unless duly called for redemption pursuant to
provisions contained therein, the holders of any such bonds then outstanding and proposed to be
refunded shall not be compelled without their consent to surrender their outstanding bonds for
such refunding. Any refunding bonds may be sold by the corporation at public or private sale at
such price or prices as may be determined by its board to be most advantageous, or may be
exchanged for the bonds or other obligations to be refunded. Any such refunding bonds may be
executed and delivered by the corporation at any time and from time to time, shall be in such
form and denominations and have such tenor and maturities, shall contain such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, and shall bear such rate or rates of interest,
payable and evidenced in such manner, as may be provided by resolution of its board.
Any refunding bonds issued by the corporation shall be issued and may be secured in accordance
with the provisions of section 7, hereof.
Section 10. Upon the adoption by the board of the corporation of any resolution providing for the
issuance of bonds, the corporation may, in its discretion, cause to be published once a week for
two consecutive weeks, in a newspaper published or having a general circulation in Clarke
county, a notice in substantially the following form (the blanks being properly filled in) at the end
of which shall be printed the name and title of either the president or secretary of such
corporation. " , a public corporation under the laws of the state of Alabama, on the   day of
 , authorized the issuance of &dollar;  principal amount of bonds of the said public
corporation for purposes authorized in the act of the legislature of Alabama under which the said
public corporation was organized. Any action or proceeding questioning the validity of the said
bonds, or the pledge and the mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture to secure the same, or
the proceedings authorizing the same, must be commenced within thirty (30) days after the first
publication of this notice."
Any action or proceeding in any court to set aside or question the proceedings for the issuance of
the bonds referred to in said notice or to contest the validity of any such bonds, or the validity of
any pledge and mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture made therefor, must be commenced
within 30 days after the first publication of such notice. After the expiration of the said period no
right of action or defense questioning or attacking the validity of the said proceedings or of the
said bonds or the said pledge or mortgage and deed of trust or trust indenture shall be asserted,
nor shall the validity of the said proceedings, bonds, pledge, mortgage, and deed of trust or trust
indenture be open to question in any court on any ground whatsoever except in an action
commenced within such period.
Section 11. The corporation and all properties at any time owned by it and the income therefrom
and all bonds issued by it and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation in the state
of Alabama, including, without limitation, ad valorem, sales, excise, license and privilege taxes;
provided, however, this exemption shall not be construed to exempt concessionaires or lessees of
the authority from the payment of any taxes, including licenses, privileges, or sales taxes levied
by the state, county or any municipality. The certificate of incorporation of the corporation, the
certificate of dissolution, all deeds or other documents whereby properties are conveyed to the
corporation and all deeds, indentures or leases executed by the corporation may be filed for
record in the office of the judge of probate of Clarke county and, if necessary, in the office of the
secretary of state, without the payment of any tax or fees other than such fees as may be
authorized by law for the recording of such instrument.
Section 12. The city of Jackson shall not in any event be liable for the payment of the principal of
or interest on any bonds of the corporation or for the performance of any pledge, mortgage,
obligation or agreement of any kind whatsoever which may be undertaken by the corporation,
and none of the bonds of the corporation or any of its agreements or obligations shall be
construed to constitute an indebtedness of the city of Jackson within the meaning of any
constitutional or statutory provision whatsoever.
Section 13. The corporation shall be exempt from the laws of the state of Alabama governing
usury or prescribing or limiting interest rates.
Section 14. The corporation shall be a nonprofit corporation and no part of its net earnings
remaining after payment of its expenses shall inure to the benefit of any individual, firm or
corporation, except that in the event a board shall determine that sufficient provision has been
made for the full payment of the expenses, bonds and other obligations of the corporation, then
any net earnings of the corporation thereafter accruing shall be paid to the city of Jackson.
Section 15. At any time when the corporation has no bonds or other obligations outstanding, its
board may adopt a resolution, which shall be duly entered upon its minutes, declaring that the
corporation shall be dissolved. Upon filing for record of a certified copy of the said resolution in
the office of the judge of probate of Clarke county, the corporation shall thereupon stand
dissolved and in the event it owned any property at the time of its dissolution, the title to all its
properties shall thereupon pass to the city of Jackson.
Section 16. [repealed]
Section 17. The contracts of the corporation shall be executed in the name of the corporation by
the president of the corporation and attested by the secretary of the corporation. Except for bonds
it is not required that the seal be impressed or printed on contracts. It is further provided hereby
that, except for bonds, the corporation may provide by resolution for a different form for the
execution of contracts and for the execution thereof by an officer or agent other than the
president and secretary. But in no event shall a contract, irrespective of the form and of the
person executing the same, be binding unless such contract was authorized or ratified by the
corporation.
Section 18. Clarke county or any municipality within the county, is authorized, but not required,
to lease, sell, donate or otherwise convey to the corporation, real or personal property, including
park properties, without the necessity of authorization by election of the qualified voters of said
county, the municipality, and the governing body of said county or any municipality within the
county, and is hereby authorized to enter into any agreements which such corporation may deem
necessary in order to effectuate such lease, sale, donation, or transfer. The governing body of
Clarke county, or any municipality within the county, is further authorized to covenant with the
corporation, which covenant shall likewise constitute a contract with the holders of any revenue
bonds, notes or other obligations thereafter issued by the corporation, that it will not acquire,
construct or operate or permit the acquisition, construction or operation within the municipality
or county, of any facility in competition with the corporation so long as any of the bonds, notes or
other obligations of the corporation shall remain outstanding.
Section 19. The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and become effective upon
the ratification of this amendment by the people.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 478 478.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 478 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Clarke County Probate Judge.
The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws applicable to or operative in
Clarke county, fix, regulate, and alter the costs and charges of courts and fees, commissions,
allowances, and salaries, including the method and basis of compensation, to be charged or
received by the judge of probate of Clarke county; and may place the judge of probate on a salary
and provide for the fees, commissions, allowances, and percentages collectible by such officer to
be paid into the treasury from which his salary is paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 479 479.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 479 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Covington County Officers.
The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate
and alter the fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be charged or received by the judge of
probate and other county officers of Covington county, and may put such officers on a salary
basis and provide for the operation of their offices on such basis.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 480 480.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 480 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Greene County Probate Judge.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the judge
of probate of Greene county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in equal
monthly installments from the general fund of Greene county such salary as provided by general
law, unless provided otherwise by local law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation
received by such judge for his services in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be
in lieu of all fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges previously paid to the
judge of probate of Greene county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Greene county shall continue to be collected but shall be paid into
the general fund of Greene county.
The county commission of Greene county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, equipment and supplies as such county commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
general fund of Greene county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 481 481.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 481 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Hale County Probate Judge.
The judge of probate of Hale county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in
equal monthly installments from the general fund of Hale county such salary as provided by
general law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation received by such judge for his services
in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions,
allowances, percentages and other charges heretofore paid to the judge of probate of Hale county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Hale county shall hereafter continue to be collected but shall be
paid into the general fund of Hale county.
The governing body of Hale county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, clerks, deputies and such quarters, books, stationery, furniture, equipment and other
such conveniences and supplies as such governing body may consider necessary for the proper
and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be fixed by
the county governing body and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the general
fund of Hale county.
The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate
and alter the fees, commissions, allowances, compensation or salaries to be charged or received
by the judge of probate of Hale county, and may provide for the operation of his office. The
legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws further provide for
the distribution of the fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges herein
provided for.
This constitutional amendment after its adoption shall not become effective until the beginning
of the next term of office of the probate judge.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 482 482.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 482 RATIFIED 1988
Limestone County Commission Authority.
The Limestone county commission is hereby authorized with or without charge to provide for the
disposal of dead farm animals, and the excavating of human graves.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 483 483.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 483 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Lowndes County Probate Judge.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the judge
of probate of Lowndes county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in equal
monthly installments from the general fund of Lowndes county such salary as provided by
general law, unless provided otherwise by local law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation
received by such judge for his services in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be
in lieu of all fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges previously paid to the
judge of probate of Lowndes county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Lowndes county shall continue to be collected but shall be paid
into the general fund of Lowndes county.
The county commission of Lowndes county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, equipment and supplies as such county commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
general fund of Lowndes county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 484 484.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 484 RATIFIED 1988
Additional Ad Valorem Tax in Morgan County.
In Morgan county, if the tax or the continuation of an expiring tax for specified purposes or for
purposes other than originally levied, not exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2 ) mills on each
dollar of taxable property in the county, by vote of a majority of the affected qualified electors of
the county who participate in any election called for that purpose, the governing body of Morgan
county shall continue for other than the original purposes, or levy and collect in addition to any
and all other taxes authorized by law said ad valorem taxes until the Mallard-Fox creek project
bond issue is repaid, for 25 years or whichever first occurs. An election shall be called by the
county governing body as they deem necessary and such election shall be conducted in the
manner which said governing body prescribes; provided, however, a public hearing with notice
shall first be called on the subject at which a majority of the members of the county commission
approve a resolution therefor.
The provisions of this amendment shall be construed in pari materia with any and all other
amendments relating to Morgan county and ad valorem taxation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 485 485.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 485 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Perry County Probate Judge.
The judge of probate of Perry county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in
equal monthly installments from the general fund of Perry county such salary as provided by
general law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation received by such judge for his services
in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions,
allowances, percentages and other charges heretofore paid to the judge of probate of Perry
county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Perry county shall hereafter continue to be collected but shall be
paid into the general fund of Perry county.
The governing body of Perry county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, clerks, deputies and such quarters, books, stationery, furniture, equipment and other
such conveniences and supplies as such governing body may consider necessary for the proper
and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be fixed by
the county governing body and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the general
fund of Perry county.
The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate
and alter the fees, commissions, allowances, compensation or salaries to be charged or received
by the judge of probate of Perry county, and may provide for the operation of his office. The
legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws further provide for
the distribution of the fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges herein
provided for.
This constitutional amendment after its adoption shall not become effective until the beginning
of the next term of office of the probate judge.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 486 486.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 486 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Sumter County Probate Judge.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the judge
of probate of Sumter county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in equal
monthly installments from the general fund of Sumter county such salary as provided by general
law, unless provided otherwise by local law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation
received by such judge for his services in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be
in lieu of all fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges previously paid to the
judge of probate of Sumter county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Sumter county shall continue to be collected but shall be paid into
the general fund of Sumter county.
The county commission of Sumter county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, equipment and supplies as such county commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
general fund of Sumter county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 487 487.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 487 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Wilcox County Probate Judge.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the judge
of probate of Wilcox county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in equal
monthly installments from the general fund of Wilcox county such salary as provided by general
law, unless provided otherwise by local law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation
received by such judge for his services in any official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be
in lieu of all fees, commissions, allowances, percentages and other charges previously paid to the
judge of probate of Wilcox county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Wilcox county shall continue to be collected but shall be paid into
the general fund of Wilcox county.
The county commission of Wilcox county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, equipment and supplies as such county commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
general fund of Wilcox county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 488 488.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 488 RATIFIED 1988
Investment of Capital and Income from Alabama Heritage Trust Fund or Alabama Trust Fund.
Any other provision of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, trust capital and trust
income held in either the Alabama heritage trust fund or the Alabama trust fund may be invested
in such kinds of investments and in accordance with such conditions as shall from time to time
be authorized by law for the investment of any of the trust funds of either the teachers' retirement
system of Alabama or the employees' retirement system of Alabama; provided, however, that if
any restrictive conditions at any time made applicable by law to either the teachers' retirement
system of Alabama or the employees' retirement system of Alabama should prohibit investments
that would otherwise be permitted for the Alabama trust fund by Amendment No. 450 to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, then, notwithstanding the restrictive conditions applicable to
said retirement systems, the investments permitted by said Amendment No. 450 shall be
permitted for trust capital and trust income held in either the Alabama heritage trust fund or the
Alabama trust fund; and provided further, that for purposes of implementing the preceding
proviso with respect to the investment of funds held in the Alabama heritage trust fund, any
provision of said Amendment No. 450 which refers to the whole or any percentage of the trust
capital of the Alabama trust fund in connection with the investment thereof shall be deemed to
refer to the trust capital of the Alabama heritage trust fund.
Any provision of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, any capital gains realized
from the sale of any investments forming a part of either the Alabama heritage trust fund or the
Alabama trust fund shall become a part of the trust capital of the fund in which such investments
were held and shall be subject to all restrictions applicable to the preservation of such trust
capital.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 489 489.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 489 RATIFIED 1988

Alabama Music Hall of Fame Authority.
I

Any provision of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Alabama music hall of fame authority (hereinafter described) is fully
authorized and empowered to sell and issue its interest bearing bonds, which shall be and
constitute general obligations of the state, in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding
$2,500,000. The expenses incurred in the sale and issuance of said bonds shall be paid by the
authority out of the proceeds derived from the sale thereof. The proceeds of said bonds remaining
after payment of said expenses shall be turned over to the state treasurer, shall be carried in a
special account of the state treasury to the credit of the authority, and shall be subject to be drawn
on solely by the authority for the purposes authorized in this amendment.
As used in this amendment, the following words and phrases shall have the following respective
meanings:
The authority is hereby fully authorized and empowered, except as herein specified or limited, to
determine the terms and conditions of said bonds and to provide for the sale and issuance thereof.
Upon issuance of said bonds by the authority, the state is authorized to and shall become
indebted, in addition to all other indebtedness of the state, in the aggregate principal amount of
such bonds issued pursuant to this amendment. The full faith and credit of the state are hereby
irrevocably pledged for the prompt and faithful payment of the principal of said bonds and the
interest and premium (if any) thereon.
The proceeds of said bonds remaining after payment of the expenses of selling and issuing the
same, together with the investment income derived from said proceeds, shall be used for the
purpose of providing funds for the acquisition, construction, installation and equipping of
buildings and other facilities consisting of any one or more of the following to be located in
Colbert county, Alabama: (i) a music hall of fame and exhibition facility for the display of busts,
statutes, plaques, books, papers, pictures, computerized figures, memorabilia, records, films,
audio tapes, video tapes, compact disks, recordings, pictures and other exhibits relating to music
and musicians, (ii) a library, research and educational center for the collection and documentation
of music and for music education and enrichment programs, (iii) an audio visual
auditorium/theatre, (iv) a recording studio, or (v) other facilities necessary or useful in
connection with the use of any of the aforesaid facilities, including the acquisition of sites and
equipment for any of the aforesaid facilities. Said proceeds may also be used to pay any costs and
expenses incidental to the aforesaid purposes for which the bonds are authorized, which may
include but shall not be limited to interest on such bonds prior to and during construction of the
aforesaid facilities to be constructed with said proceeds and for not exceeding one year after
completion of construction. The authority is hereby fully authorized and empowered, except as
herein specified or limited, to determine which of the aforesaid facilities shall be acquired,
constructed, installed or equipped by the authority using the aforesaid proceeds. The plans and
specifications for any building or other facility acquired, constructed, installed or equipped with
proceeds of said bonds shall be approved solely by the authority.
The authority is also authorized and empowered to sell and issue one or more series of its bonds,
which shall be and constitute general obligations of the state, to refund all or any of the bonds
authorized by this amendment in such principal amount or amounts (which may exceed the
principal amount of the bonds being refunded) and in such manner as may be provided by
resolution duly adopted by the authority. The authority is also hereby fully authorized and
empowered, except as herein specified or limited, to determine the terms and conditions of such
refunding bonds and to provide for the sale and issuance thereof. Upon issuance of said bonds by
the authority, the state is authorized to and shall become indebted, in addition to all other
indebtedness of the state, in the aggregate principal amount of such refunding bonds issued
pursuant to this amendment. The full faith and credit of the state are hereby irrevocably pledged
for the prompt and faithful payment of the principal of said refunding bonds and the interest and
premium (if any) thereon.
All of said bonds issued by the authority (including refunding bonds) may be sold only at public
sale, with competitive bidding, to such person or persons, at such price or prices and upon such
terms as the authority shall determine to be in the best interest of the authority and the state.
Neither a public hearing nor consent of the state (including any officer, official, department or
other agency of the state) shall be a prerequisite to issuance of any bonds by the authority.
Nothing in this amendment or in any other provision of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as
amended, shall prevent the authority from selling and issuing one or more additional series of its
bonds which shall be solely revenue obligations of the authority and which shall not create
general obligations or debts of the state.
II
There is hereby created and established a state agency to be known as the Alabama music hall of
fame authority which shall be a public body corporate with all the powers and privileges of a
corporation, for the purpose of providing for and participating in the management and control of
the aforesaid facilities.
The members of the board, and their respective successors as members thereof shall constitute ex
officio all the members of the authority. The chairman, vice chairman, secretary and treasurer of
the board shall constitute ex officio the chairman, vice chairman, secretary and treasurer
respectively of the authority. The authority, at its option, may appoint an assistant secretary who
need not be a member of the authority. The members of the authority shall constitute the
governing body of the authority. The presence of any four members of the authority shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No vacancy in the membership of the
authority or the voluntary disqualification or abstention of any member thereof shall impair the
right of a quorum of the authority to act. Should any member of the authority cease to be a
member or officer of the board by reason of death, resignation, expiration of his term of office, or
for any other reason, then his successor as a member or officer of the board shall take his place as
a member or officer, as the case may be, of the authority.
The authority may adopt such rules, regulations and bylaws as it may determine to be necessary
or desirable for the conduct of its duties, powers or functions. The authority is authorized and
empowered to use the moneys, services, facilities and employees of the board in carrying out its
functions or in furthering the objects or purposes of this amendment. Reasonable compensation
and expense allowances for members or officers of the authority may from time to time be
altered or provided for by legislative act. No member, officer or employee of the authority or the
board shall be personally liable for any debt, obligation or liability of the authority, the board or
the state.
III
The authority shall be authorized:
IV
In view of the unique character and complexity of the duties and responsibilities imposed on the
authority by this amendment, it is hereby specifically provided that the authority shall have, in
addition to the power and the authority enumerated in part III of this amendment, the right, power
and authority to:
V
The authority and the board, the property and the income of the authority and the board, all bonds
issued by the authority, the income from such bonds, conveyances by or to the authority or the
board, and leases, mortgages and deeds of trust or trust indentures by or to the authority or the
board shall be exempt from all taxation in the state of Alabama. The authority and the board shall
be exempt from all taxes levied by any county, incorporated city or town, or other political
subdivision of the state, including, but without limitation to, license and excise taxes imposed in
respect of the privilege of engaging in any of the activities in which the authority or the board
may engage. The authority and the board shall not be obligated to pay or allow any fee, taxes or
costs to the judge of probate of any county of the state in respect of the recording of any
document.
The authority and the board are arms of the state, existing to carry forth important functions of
the state government, and as such they constitute part of the state for purposes of Article I,
Section 14 of the Constitution of 1901, as amended, and the members and officers of the
authority and the board are state officers for purposes of said Section 14 of the Constitution
whose duties and functions are discretionary in nature. No proceeding, notice or approval shall be
required for the issuance of any bonds, the execution of any mortgage and deed of trust or trust
indenture, or the exercise of any other of its powers by the authority.
VI
Any bonds of the authority may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to
time, may be in such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be such tenor and
maturities, may bear such date or dates, may be payable in such installments and at such place or
places, may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may
contain provisions for redemption at the option of the authority at such date or dates prior to their
maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as shall be provided by the
authority in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds are issued. The principal of each
series of bonds shall mature in annual installments in such amounts as shall be specified in the
resolution or resolutions of the said board under which they are issued, the first of which
installments shall mature not later than three years after the date of the bonds of such series and
the last of which installments shall mature not later than 30 years after the date of the bonds of
the same series.
The bonds shall be signed in the name of the authority by its chairman and the great seal of the
state of Alabama, or a facsimile thereof, shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced
thereon and shall be attested by the signature of the secretary of the authority; provided that
facsimile signatures of said officers may be reproduced on such bonds in lieu of their manually
signing the same.
The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and no further authorization from the
legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any bonds issued hereunder, although the
legislature may enact appropriate implementing laws, whether before or after the effective date of
this amendment, which are not in conflict herewith. Act No. 87-613, Acts of Alabama 1987, is
such an implementing law and shall become effective upon the ratification of this amendment by
the qualified electors of this state.
VII
The state is authorized to pay from any of its revenues of whatsoever nature and make available
to the authority at any time and from time to time such sums as the authority determines are
necessary for the prompt and faithful payment of the principal, the interest and premium (if any)
on the bonds of e authority in the event the authority determines that appropriations by the
legislature and other revenues of the authority (including bond proceeds) remaining after the
payment of operating and other expenses are insufficient for the payment of said principal,
interest and premium.
VIII
The provisions of this amendment shall be construed liberally, it being the purpose to provide in
this state appropriate housing facilities for displaying to the general public exhibits of the
authority and the board and for the management and control of displays by such means as may be
determined to be feasible and agreed upon by the authority and the board.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 490 490.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 490 RATIFIED 1988
Marion County Public Water Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation,
organization, operation, administration, authority and financing of a Marion county public water
authority in all or in portions of Marion county as a public corporation to provide any one or
more of the following local public services: Obtaining, treating, and furnishing water for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes and for any other local service permitted by such
general or local law; authorize such authority to fix and collect rates, fees and charges for such
services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property within such public
water authority; grant or vest the privilege of eminent domain to such public water authority for
the purpose of taking property for public use in accordance with Article XII, Section 235, of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901; authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance of bonds
and other obligations by or on behalf of such public water authority, provided that Marion county
shall not be responsible for any such bond or obligation and no such bond or obligation shall be
chargeable against the limit on the debt of Marion county; extend the service area into one or
more other counties; and provide for fire protection facilities or services. Any law enacted at the
1988 Regular Session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such public water authority in
Marion county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with or without
published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 491 491.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 491 RATIFIED 1988
Effectiveness of Laws Providing for Expenditure of Municipal Funds.
No law, whether general, special or local, whose purpose or effect is to provide for a new or
increased expenditure of municipal funds held or disbursed by the municipal governing body
shall become effective as to any municipality of this state until the first day of the fiscal year next
following the passage of such law. The foregoing notwithstanding, a law, whether general,
special or local, whose purpose or effect is to provide for a new or increased expenditure of
municipal funds held or disbursed by the municipal governing body, shall become effective
according to its own terms as any other law if: (1) Such law is approved by a resolution duly
adopted by and spread upon the minutes of the municipal governing body of the municipality
affected thereby; or (2) Such law (or other law or laws which specifically refer to such law)
provides the respective municipal governing bodies with new or additional revenues sufficient to
fund such new or increased expenditures.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 492 492.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 492 RATIFIED 1988
Promotion of Catfish Industry.
The legislature may hereafter, by general law, provide for the promotion of the production,
distribution, improvement, marketing, use and sale of catfish. The legislature may provide for the
promotion of catfish and catfish products by research, education, advertising and other methods,
and the legislature is further authorized to provide means and methods for the financing of any
such promotional activity by prescribing a procedure whereby producers of catfish by
referendum among such producers levy upon themselves and collect assessments, fees, or
charges upon the purchase of catfish feed for the financing of any such promotional program or
activity in cooperation with buyers, processors, dealers, distributors of catfish feed and handlers
of catfish. The legislature may make provisions for the nonpayment of assessments by catfish
producers and shall make provisions for the refund of assessments to any purchaser of catfish
feed who does not desire to participate in an assessment program.
The legislature shall provide for the collection, disbursement, distribution or expenditure of
assessments or charges authorized hereunder and to provide penalties for failure to make
collection and distribution of assessments. The legislature shall provide for the designation of a
nonprofit association or organization for the promotion and betterment of catfish and catfish
products to administer and carry out such promotional program which shall include the
conducting of elections or referendums among producers of catfish. The legislature may provide
the manner by which such referendum is held, including the procedure for application for
approval to conduct the referendum, the appropriate action to be taken by the state board of
agriculture and industries on such application, the requirements and eligibility of the association
or organization which will conduct such referendum, the procedures for voting and eligibility to
vote in such referendum, the details of the conduct of such referendum. The legislature shall
further provide for the deposit, withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by the designated
association of any funds received subject to the supervision and control of the activities as
authorized herein by the department of agriculture and industries and the state board of
agriculture and industries. The legislature shall further provide a procedure whereby said
association or organization is bonded, for the examination and auditing of said association or
organization, and for reasonably necessary rules and regulations to be adopted by the state board
of agriculture and industries to effectively carry out the intent and purposes herein enumerated.
Assessments, fees or other charges collected as authorized by any legislative act adopted under
authority hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the meaning of this constitution or any
provision thereof. Any uniformity requirements of this constitution shall be satisfied by the
application of the program upon catfish.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 493 493.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 493 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Probate Judge of Autauga County.
Commencing at the next term of office, the probate judge of Autauga county shall be entitled to
receive compensation in the form of an annual salary. Such annual salary shall be the amount of
the minimum salary prescribed by general law and shall continue for the first three years of such
term of office. Thereafter, the minimum annual salary of the probate judge of Autauga county
shall be 90 percent of the annual compensation and allowance paid the presiding circuit judge of
the 19th judicial circuit or the minimum salary prescribed by general law, whichever is higher.
Such salary shall be paid in lieu of all other fees, allowances, and percentages heretofore
provided by law, and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the general fund in the
county treasury.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Autauga county shall hereafter continue to be collected but shall be
paid into the county general fund.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 494 494.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 494 RATIFIED 1988
Appropriation by City of Anniston in Calhoun County for East Alabama United Cerebral Palsy
Center.
The governing body of the city of Anniston in Calhoun county is hereby authorized to
appropriate the sum of $35,000.00 from public funds on a one-time basis only to the East
Alabama United Cerebral Palsy Center for the cost of its complex at the Jaycee park.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 495 495.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 495 RATIFIED 1988
Compensation of Choctaw County Probate Judge.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the judge
of probate of Choctaw county shall be compensated on a salary basis. He shall receive in equal
monthly installments from the general fund of Choctaw county such salary as provided by local
law. Such salary shall be the entire compensation received by such judge for his services in any
official or ex officio capacity. Such salary shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, allowances,
percentages and other charges previously paid to the judge of probate of Choctaw county.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the judge of probate of Choctaw county shall continue to be collected but shall be paid
into the general fund of Choctaw county.
The county commission of Choctaw county shall provide the judge of probate with such office
personnel, equipment and supplies as such county commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of his office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
general fund of Choctaw county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 497 497.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 497 RATIFIED 1988
Prohibition of Overgrowth of Weeds and Storage and Accumulation of Certain Junk, Motor
Vehicles and Litter in Jefferson County.
The legislature may from time to time by local act authorize or require the Jefferson county
commission to:

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 498 498.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 498 RATIFIED 1988
Levy and Collection of Financial Charges or Assessments in Fire Fighting Districts of Lee
County.
The governing body of Lee county shall be and is hereby authorized to levy and to collect
financial charges or assessments upon and with respect to any or all property (which financial
charges or assessments, regardless of whether considered to be property taxes, need not be
assessed in exact proportion to the value of property subject to such financial charges or
assessments) within the boundaries of any one or more fire fighting districts in Lee county
established by said governing body pursuant to the provisions of that certain amendment to the
Constitution proposed by Act No. 80-313, enacted at the 1980 Regular Session of the legislature,
and known as Amendment No. 392. Any such financial charge or assessment shall, subject to
succeeding provisions of this amendment, be so levied and collected at such rate or rates, for
such period or periods of time, on such basis (whether ad valorem, or otherwise) and otherwise
on such terms and conditions as shall from time to time be specified, provided or limited by the
legislature by general, special or local law, and as said governing body may, consistently with
then applicable provisions of such general, special or local law, determine; provided however,
that no such financial charge or assessment shall be so levied or collected in any such district
unless a majority of the qualified electors residing in such district and voting at an election called
for such purpose approve the levy and collection of such financial charge or assessment within
such district, at such rate (not to exceed the maximum rate then permitted by law) and for such
period of time (not to exceed the maximum period of time then permitted by law) as shall be
briefly described or summarized on the ballot used in such election. Thereafter no increase in the
rate of such financial charge or assessment above the rate or maximum rate (as the case may be)
so approved by the electorate of such district, and no extension of the period of time or maximum
period of time (as the case may be) for which such financial charge or assessment shall have been
authorized to be levied and collected within such district, shall be effective except upon approval
by a majority of the qualified electors residing in such district and voting at an election called for
such purpose. Any provision of the Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding (including
specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Section 190, as amended), the
legislature may, by general, special or local law, provide for and otherwise regulate elections
held under or pursuant to the provisions of this amendment.
The proceeds of any financial charge or assessment levied and collected pursuant to the
provisions of this amendment shall be expended solely for payment of expenses of (i) providing
fire protection services and facilities within the district in which such financial charge or
assessment is so levied and collected (either directly or indirectly, as the legislature may specify),
but otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid Amendment No. 392, and (ii)
levying and collecting such financial charge or assessment. Any such financial charge or
assessment may, any provision of the Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, be levied
upon and with respect to any property within the boundaries of the district in question regardless
of whether such property is otherwise exempt from property taxation (on an ad valorem basis or
otherwise).
The legislature shall, any provision of the Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding (including
specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, Section 105), have the power,
by general, special or local law, to provide for the implementation of the provisions of this
amendment and otherwise to enact laws in furtherance of the purposes hereof and of the
aforesaid Amendment No. 392. Any such law enacted at the session of the legislature at which
this amendment is proposed shall be and hereby is ratified, approved, validated and confirmed in
all respects notwithstanding that notice of intention to apply therefor was not published as
specified in Section 106 of the Constitution, as amended, provided that (1) notice of intention to
apply therefor and stating the substance thereof shall have been published one time in a
newspaper published in Lee county, and (2) such law by its terms becomes effective only upon
the ratification of this amendment. Furthermore, the aforesaid Amendment No. 392 shall be and
hereby is ratified, approved, validated and confirmed in all respects.
The provisions of this amendment shall not, except to the extent expressly provided herein, be
construed as self-executing, it being understood that no financial charge or assessment shall be
levied hereunder and no election with respect thereto shall be held hereunder unless and until the
legislature, by general, special or local law, shall have (a) specified the rate or rates (or maximum
rate) at which, and the period or periods (or maximum period) for which, any such financial
charge or assessment may be levied, as well as the basis for any such financial charge or
assessment, and (b) provided for elections to be held under or pursuant to the provisions of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 499 499.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 499 RATIFIED 1988
Municipality Police Jurisdiction in Limestone County.
In Limestone county, no police jurisdiction of a municipality located wholly or partially within
Limestone county shall extend beyond the corporate limits of the municipality.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 500 500.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 500 RATIFIED 1988
Investment of Municipal Funds and County Funds by Mobile County.
The terms "municipal funds" and "county funds" as used in this amendment shall include all
general, special, permanent, trust and other funds, regardless of source or purpose, held or
administered by Mobile county, any city or town in Mobile county, or by any officer or agency
thereof.
In addition to any investments or obligations provided for by general law, any municipal or
county funds not needed for other purposes may be invested in the procurement of secured
repurchase agreements, secured commercial paper and secured banker's acceptance, invested
overnight and invested in higher yield rates of return for more flexible maturities.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 501 501.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 501 RATIFIED 1988
Fire Protection Districts and Taxes in Monroe County.
The Monroe county commission is hereby authorized in its discretion to establish fire districts
within the geographical boundaries of Monroe county. The boundaries of such fire districts may
be rearranged at the discretion of the county commission as it deems necessary, from time to
time, to maximize fire protection services in the county. The county commission may use the
corporate limits of the various towns and municipalities in the county as boundaries for fire
districts. In such situations, such town or municipal fire district shall have its own volunteer fire
department functioning within its boundaries. Each fire district established in an area located
outside of the corporate limits of a town or municipality shall likewise have its own volunteer
fire department functioning strictly within its district boundaries.
The county commission is further authorized to enter into agreements with volunteer fire
departments within such county for fire protection and services.
Commencing with the levy for the tax year for which taxes will become due and payable on
October 1, 1989, there is hereby levied, in addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be
hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of three mills.
The fire protection tax levied herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal property
assessed by affected property owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of Monroe
county, Alabama, and shall be assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in the county.
The amount collected each year from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be paid into the
county general fund and used in furtherance of fire protection and for rescue squads within the
affected area. Prior to the levy of the fire protection tax in said county, there shall be submitted to
the electors of said county, at a special election called for that purpose in said county, the
question of whether the said tax shall be levied, and the said tax shall be authorized at such
election by a majority of the qualified electors within the said county who vote at such election.
Elections on the question of the levy of a fire protection tax in said county may be held at any
time and from time to time, provided, that if any such election held after the ratification of this
amendment the proposal to levy the tax so submitted should be defeated then the proposal may
not be submitted at another election held in said county within two years from the last election
held under this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 502 502.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 502 RATIFIED 1988

Morgan County Sheriff's Posse.
The county commission of Morgan county is hereby authorized to grant moneys to the Morgan
county sheriff's posse. Any purchases with said moneys by the Morgan county sheriff's posse
shall be the property of the Morgan county sheriff's office.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 503 503.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 503 RATIFIED 1988

Pike County Government Modernization.
Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama or local laws to the contrary
notwithstanding, in order to modernize the operation of government in Pike county, the
legislature may, during the current session of the legislature, provide by local act all of the
following:
In the event this amendment is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of Pike county
who vote thereon in favor of the adoption of all three of the provisions of this amendment when
it is submitted, then any law theretofore or thereafter passed, which implements this amendment,
may become effective without any other election having been held thereon; in the event this
amendment fails and a majority of the qualified voters in Pike county voting thereon vote against
its approval, such acts or act shall become null and void, and no one provision of this amendment
shall become law unless all provisions are approved, or unless the acts are separately resubmitted
to the qualified electorate of Pike county for approval thereof. All three proposals in one act shall
not be deemed to contravene Section 45 of the Constitution of 1901.
The ballot on the approval of this amendment shall be substantially as follows:
"Do you approve the Pike County Government Modernization Amendment? Yes  . No  ."
The provisions of this amendment are self-executing as herein provided.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 504 504.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 504 RATIFIED 1988

Financing Jail in Talladega County.
In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized, and notwithstanding any
other provision of the Constitution, including without limitation Sections 96, 104 and 105 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, there shall be a $10.00 fee assessed on all civil
and criminal cases filed in the circuit court, district court or any municipal court in Talladega
county. All funds generated from such fee shall be paid into the general fund of Talladega county
and shall be used exclusively for the design and construction of a county jail, including the
payment of principal and interest on any obligations issued by or on behalf of Talladega county
(a) to finance such design and construction and the expenses of issuance thereof, or (b) to refund
any such objections and pay the costs of refunding. When the jail is paid for or when all such
obligations are paid in full, whichever last occurs, the additional fee levied by this amendment
shall be removed from all cases except criminal cases, upon which the said additional fee shall
continue to be levied, to be used for operation, upkeep and maintenance of the county jail. This
amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 505 505.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1988 ***

AMENDMENT 505 RATIFIED 1988

Washington County Fire Districts.
The Washington county commission is hereby authorized in its discretion to establish fire
districts within the geographical boundaries of Washington county. The boundaries of such fire
districts may be rearranged at the discretion of the county commission as it deems necessary from
time to time, to maximize fire protection services in the county. The county commission may use
the corporate limits of the various towns and municipalities in the county as boundaries for fire
districts. In such situations, such town or municipal fire district shall have its own volunteer fire
department functioning within its boundaries. Each fire district established in an area located
outside of the corporate limits of a town or municipality shall likewise have its own volunteer
fire department functioning strictly within its district boundaries.
The county commission is further authorized to enter into agreements with volunteer fire
departments within such county for fire protection and services.
There is hereby levied commencing October 1, 1989, in addition to any taxes now authorized or
that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of
two mills. The fire protection tax levied herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal
property assessed by affected property owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of
Washington county, Alabama, and shall be assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in
the county. The amount collected each year from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be
paid into the county general fund and used in furtherance of fire protection within the affected
area.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 506 506.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1989 ***

AMENDMENT 506 RATIFIED 1989

Bingo Games in Etowah County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable or educational purposes shall be legal in Etowah county, subject to the provisions of
any resolution by the county commission. The county commission shall have the authority to
promulgate rules and regulations for the issuance of permits or licenses and for operation of
bingo games; provided, however, the county commission must insure compliance pursuant to
said law and the following provisions:
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall
have the right and power by general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the general purposes and objectives herein set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 507 507.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1989 ***

AMENDMENT 507 RATIFIED 1989

Filing and Service Fees in Russell County for Financing New County Jail.
In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized to be collected, the county
commission of Russell county is authorized to assess a fee not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00)
upon the privilege of filing any initial complaint in all civil and criminal cases filed in any court,
in the county, as well as a fee not to exceed five dollars ($5.00) for the service of all pleadings
and other documents in connection with any such action. All such fees shall be paid into the
general fund and shall be applied exclusively for payment of the cost of the planning,
construction and equipping of a new county jail, or for the payment of the principal of and
interest on any bonds, warrants or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the county to
finance the costs of a new jail, as well as the expenses of issuance of any such bonds, warrants or
other obligations. When the aforesaid costs of planning, constructing and equipping a new county
jail shall be fully paid or when all such bonds, warrants or other obligations have been retired,
whichever last occurs, the additional fee authorized by this amendment to be collected shall no
longer be collected. Provided, however, no additional fee provided herein shall be collected until
thirty (30) days after the county commission has signed a contract and or contracts for the
construction of a new jail and construction has actually begun.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 508 508.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 508 RATIFIED 1990

Bingo Games in Calhoun County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in Calhoun county, subject to the
provisions of any resolution or ordinance by the county governing body or the governing bodies
of the respective cities and towns, within their respective jurisdictions as provided by law
regulating such operation. The said governing bodies shall have the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations for the issuance of permits or licenses and for operation of bingo games, within
their respective jurisdictions; provided, however, that said governing bodies must ensure
compliance pursuant to said law and the following provisions:
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall
have the right and power by general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the general purposes and objectives herein set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 509 509.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 509 RATIFIED 1990

English as Official Language of State.
English is the official language of the state of Alabama. The legislature shall enforce this
amendment by appropriate legislation. The legislature and officials of the state of Alabama shall
take all steps necessary to insure that the role of English as the common language of the state of
Alabama is preserved and enhanced. The legislature shall make no law which diminishes or
ignores the role of English as the common language of the state of Alabama.
Any person who is a resident of or doing business in the state of Alabama shall have standing to
sue the state of Alabama to enforce this amendment, and the courts of record of the state of
Alabama shall have jurisdiction to hear cases brought to enforce this provision. The legislature
may provide reasonable and appropriate limitations on the time and manner of suits brought
under this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 510 510.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 510 RATIFIED 1990

Deepening, Widening and Extending of Federal Channel at Bayou La Batre and Acquisition,
Development, etc., of Cargo Handling Facilities of State Docks at Port of Mobile.
The legislature may by appropriate laws authorize the state to pay a portion of the capital costs of
public facilities and works of internal improvement consisting of (a) fulfilling a portion of the
requirements of local contribution, participation and cooperation now or hereafter established by
the United States in connection with the deepening, widening and extending of the existing
federal channel at Bayou La Batre, Alabama and (b) the acquisition, development, construction,
improvement, expansion, and modernization (or any of them) of general cargo handling facilities
of the state docks at the Port of Mobile.
The legislature may by appropriate laws authorize the state to become indebted and, in evidence
of such indebtedness, to sell and issue its interest-bearing bonds, in an aggregate principal
amount not exceeding $20,000,000, for the purpose of enabling the state to discharge obligations
at any time authorized by the legislature to be undertaken in connection with the channel
deepening project and the state docks projects. The expenses incurred in connection with the sale
and issuance of the bonds may also be paid from the proceeds thereof. The bonds may be sold by
the bond commission authorized herein at public or private sale, with or without competitive
bidding, at such price or prices and on such terms and conditions as the bond commission shall
determine to be in the best interest of the state. Bonds evidencing the herein provided for
indebtedness may be issued as direct general obligations of the state, and the state may pledge its
full faith and credit to the prompt payment of the principal of the bonds and the interest and
redemption premium (if any) thereon. The said bonds may be additionally secured by any special
pledges that may be provided for by the legislature. The herein provided for indebtedness shall
not be construed to prohibit or limit appropriations from the general fund of the state which from
time to time may be made for the purpose of enabling the state to discharge obligations at any
time authorized by the legislature to be undertaken in connection with the channel deepening
project and the state docks projects.
The legislature may by appropriate laws establish a bond commission and may confer upon it, in
addition to all other necessary powers, full power to determine the terms and conditions of the
bonds and to provide for the sale and issuance thereof. The legislature may authorize the herein
provided for general obligation bonds of the state to be sold from time to time under the
supervision of such bond commission. All monies received as proceeds of the sale of the state's
bonds, shall be expended, except for reasonable issuance costs and administrative expenses, in
discharging obligations that the state is permitted under the foregoing provisions of this
amendment to undertake in connection with the channel deepening project and the state docks
projects. The legislature shall enact appropriate enabling legislation to carry out the intent and
purpose of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 511 511.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 511 RATIFIED 1990

Finance Charge, Fee or Assessment on Forest Land for Forestry Services and Forest Fire
Protection.
(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, the legislature may hereafter levy a
finance charge, fee or assessment on forest land in this state at a rate of a maximum of twenty
(20) cents per acre on a per acre basis of forest land owned and as established by general act of
the legislature. The legislature is authorized to provide that the proceeds generated in each county
shall be earmarked for use in the respective county where raised to provide for forestry services
and forest fire protection within the county. The legislature may provide that this charge, fee, or
assessment shall be levied on forest land as is defined by the legislature, and that said charge, fee,
or assessment will be assessed and collected as ad valorem taxes in this state.
The legislature may further provide that all revenues or monies collected from said forest land
shall be distributed by the office of the county tax collector, or similar office, to the Alabama
forestry commission, state of Alabama. The legislature shall provide that the forestry and fire
prevention program set forth herein shall be administered by the Alabama forestry commission
and that any funds collected but not spent in a particular fiscal year shall be carried into the next
fiscal year for the same purposes in that county. The legislature may provide that local laws
heretofore enacted relating to forest fire protection, and assessing a local acreage assessment, use
tax, finance charge or other fee, tax, charge or assessment, in support thereof, which conflict with
the provisions of that act shall be repealed; replaced or superceded by that act at a time to be
designated by the legislature.
(B) The legislature may from time to time pass such legislation as may be necessary to further
define terms herein or to otherwise implement this amendment or the levying, collecting,
distributing or administering of fees, charges or assessments provided for herein. The legislature
may provide for and is authorized to provide the procedure whereby owners of forest land may,
by referendum held among such owners in this state, levy upon themselves fees, charges and
assessments, based upon the amount of acreage of forest land owned. The legislature is
authorized to make provisions for nonpayment of such fees, charges or assessments authorized
hereunder and to provide penalties for failure to pay same. The legislature may further provide
for the withdrawal, disbursement and expenditure by the Alabama forestry commission of any
funds received. Assessments, fees, or other charges collected as authorized by any legislative act
adopted under authority hereof shall not be considered as a tax within the meaning of this
Constitution or any provision thereof. The legislature may further provide for or allow reasonable
rules and regulations to be adopted by the Alabama forestry commission to effectively carry out
the intent and purposes herein enumerated. Any uniformity requirements of this Constitution
shall be satisfied by the application of the program to forest fire protection and similar forestry
services.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 512 512.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 512 RATIFIED 1990

"Penny Trust Fund" Established for Promotion of Public Health and Public Schools.
(a) There shall be established and maintained the "penny trust fund" within the state treasury to
promote the public health and the public schools. Citizens may make voluntary donations to the
penny trust fund. All donations and funds received shall be held in perpetual trust and shall not
be subject to legislative appropriation or otherwise expended.
(b) Earnings, including accrued interest and dividends, shall be retained in the penny trust fund,
not subject to appropriation until the state treasurer certifies that sufficient moneys exist in the
Fund or until the fiscal year which begins in 2000, whichever comes first; then and afterward,
only 90 percent of the prior fiscal year's earnings to be subject to appropriation. Capital gains
taken on the sale of any securities shall revert to the principal of the penny trust fund.
(c) Funds in the penny trust fund are to be managed and invested by the state treasurer who may
receive funds from any source not prohibited by law.
(d) Fifty percent of the earnings subject to appropriation shall be dedicated to the programs and
projects which promote the public health, and 50 percent dedicated to the public schools.
(e) The legislature shall have power to implement this amendment by appropriate legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 513 098.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 513 RATIFIED 1990

Amendment of Section 98.
Section 98. The legislature shall not retire any officer on pay, or part pay, or make any grant to
such retiring officer; however, the legislature shall have the authority to provide that
superintendents of education shall be eligible to participate in the Teachers' Retirement System of
Alabama as the legislature may see fit.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 514 514.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 514 RATIFIED 1990

Appropriations to Certain Nonprofit Organizations by City of Huntsville.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, the
governing body of the city of Huntsville in Madison county is hereby authorized to make a one-
time appropriation of money, up to a maximum total appropriation of $2,000,000.00, to one or
more bona fide nonprofit organizations, each of which at the time of any such appropriation must
have been organized for the purpose of and actively engaged in fostering and coordinating
volunteer citizen activity in the field of the literary, visual, and performing arts within the city of
Huntsville for a period of more than five years, which said appropriation or appropriations are to
be used exclusively for construction of one or more buildings located within said city, to be
owned by such organization. The total maximum appropriation herein authorized may, however,
at the discretion of the governing body, be made to only one such organization, provided,
however, that any such appropriation may be made only upon proof that an amount equal to
$1.00 for each $1.00 appropriated has first been raised from nonpublic funds and placed on
deposit with a bank or trust company under an agreement, restricting the use of said funds to
expenditures for the construction of one or more buildings to be occupied exclusively by one or
more organizations engaged in fostering and coordinating volunteer citizen activity in the field of
the literary, visual, and performing arts within the city of Huntsville. The city of Huntsville is
further authorized to appropriate up to $100,000.00 annually for the general operations of any
such organization, or for maintenance of any building which is occupied by any such
organization.
No payment may be made by the city of Huntsville under the authority of this amendment except
upon the affirmative vote of the qualified electors of the city of Huntsville, in the election called
for the ratification of this amendment, or at a subsequent election called for such purpose as
hereinafter provided. Provided, however, that if this amendment is ratified, and a majority of the
electors of the city of Huntsville do not vote in favor of such amendment, subsequent elections
for the purpose of authorizing the governing body to make such appropriations to qualified
organizations may be called by the governing body in the same manner and at the same time as
any other general or special municipal election, but not more than one such election shall be held
during any period of 12 consecutive months.
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall
have the right and power by general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the general purpose and objectives herein set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 515 515.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 515 RATIFIED 1990

Winston County Water Coordinating and Fire Prevention Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation, organization,
operation, administration, authority and financing of a Winston county water coordinating and
fire prevention authority in all or in portions of Winston county as a public corporation to
provide any one or more of the following local public services: Obtain, treat, and furnish water
for residential, commercial or industrial purposes and for any other local service permitted by
such general or local law; authorize such authority to fix and collect rates, fees and charges for
such services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property within such
public water authority; grant or vest the privilege of eminent domain to such public water
authority for the purpose of taking property for public use in accordance with Article XII, Section
235, of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901; authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance
of bonds and other obligations by or on behalf of such public water authority, provided that
Winston county shall not be responsible for any such bond or obligation and no such bond or
obligation shall be chargeable against the limit on the debt of Winston county; extend the service
area into one or more other counties; and provide for fire protection facilities or services. Any
law enacted at the 1988 special session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such
authority in Winston county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with
or without published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 516 516.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 516 RATIFIED 1990

Lamar County Water Coordinating and Fire Prevention Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation,
organization, operation, administration, authority and financing of a Lamar county water
coordinating and fire prevention authority in all or in portions of Lamar county as a public
corporation to provide any one or more of the following local public services: Obtain, treat, and
furnish water for residential, commercial or industrial purposes and for any other local service
permitted by such general or local law; authorize such authority to fix and collect rates, fees and
charges for such services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property
within such public water authority; grant or vest the privilege of eminent domain to such public
water authority for the purpose of taking property for public use in accordance with Article XII,
Section 235, of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901; authorize the borrowing of money and the
issuance of bonds and other obligations by or on behalf of such public water authority, provided
that Lamar county shall not be responsible for any such bond or obligation and no such bond or
obligation shall be chargeable against the limit on the debt of Lamar county; extend the service
area into one or more other counties; and provide for fire protection facilities or services. Any
law enacted at the 1988 special session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such
authority in Lamar county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with or
without published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 517 517.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 517 RATIFIED 1990

Fayette County Water Coordinating and Fire Prevention Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation,
organization, operation, administration, authority and financing of a Fayette county water
coordinating and fire prevention authority in all or in portions of Fayette county as a public
corporation to provide any one or more of the following local public services: Obtain, treat, and
furnish water for residential, commercial or industrial purposes and for any other local service
permitted by such general or local law; authorize such authority to fix and collect rates, fees and
charges for such services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property
within such public water authority; grant or vest the privilege of eminent domain to such public
water authority for the purpose of taking property for public use in accordance with Article XII,
Section 235, of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901; authorize the borrowing of money and the
issuance of bonds and other obligations by or on behalf of such public water authority, provided
that Fayette county shall not be responsible for any such bond or obligation and no such bond or
obligation shall be chargeable against the limit on the debt of Fayette county; extend the service
area into one or more other counties; and provide for fire protection facilities or services. Any
law enacted at the 1988 special session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such
authority in Fayette county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with
or without published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 518 518.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 518 RATIFIED 1990

Franklin County Water Coordinating and Fire Prevention Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation, organization,
operation, administration, authority and financing of a Franklin county water coordinating and
fire prevention authority in all or in portions of Franklin county as a public corporation to provide
any one or more of the following local public services: Obtain, treat, and furnish water for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes and for any other local service permitted by such
general or local law; authorize such authority to fix and collect rates, fees and charges for such
services, and to provide penalties for nonpayment and liens upon the property within such public
water authority; grant or vest the privilege of eminent domain to such public water authority for
the purpose of taking property for public use in accordance with Article XII, Section 235, of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901; authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance of bonds
and other obligations by or on behalf of such public water authority, provided that Franklin
county shall not be responsible for any such bond or obligation and no such bond or obligation
shall be chargeable against the limit on the debt of Franklin county; extend the service area into
one or more other counties; and provide for fire protection facilities or services. Any law enacted
at the 1988 special session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such authority in
Franklin county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with or without
published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 519 519.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 519 RATIFIED 1990

Jackson County Water Authority.
The legislature may, by general or local law, provide for the creation, incorporation, organization,
operation, administration, authority and financing of the Jackson county water authority in all or
in portions of Jackson county as a public corporation to provide any one or more of the following
local public services: Obtain, treat, and furnish water for residential, commercial or industrial
purposes and for any other local service permitted by such general or local law; authorize such
authority to fix and collect rates, fees and charges for such services, and to provide penalties for
nonpayment and liens upon the property within such public water authority; grant or vest the
privilege of eminent domain to such public water authority for the purpose of taking property for
public use in accordance with Article XII, Section 235, of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901;
authorize the borrowing of money and the issuance of bonds and other obligations by or on
behalf of such public water authority, provided that Jackson county shall not be responsible for
any such bond or obligation and no such bond or obligation shall be chargeable against the limit
on the debt of Jackson county; and extend the service area into one or more other counties. Any
law enacted at the 1989 regular session of the legislature to authorize the creation of such
authority in Jackson county and to implement this amendment to the Constitution (whether with
or without published notice of intention) shall become effective upon the ratification of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 520 520.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 520 RATIFIED 1990

Excavating Human Graves in Madison County.
The Madison county commission is hereby authorized with or without charge to provide for the
excavating of human graves.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 521 521.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 521 RATIFIED 1990

Fees for Disposal of Solid Waste in Pickens County.
The Pickens county governing body shall levy and impose a fee of not less than sixty dollars per
ton on solid waste, as defined by general law, disposed of at any commercial disposal site in the
county. Said governing body is hereby authorized to implement such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary to impose and collect such disposal fees and the proceeds of such fees shall be
deposited in the county treasury to be expended for the general operations of the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 522 522.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 522 RATIFIED 1990

Taxation of Costs in Pickens County.
In Pickens county, in addition to all other fees, there shall be taxed as costs the sum of $10.00 in
each civil or quasi-civil action at law, suit in equity, criminal case, quasi-criminal case,
proceedings on a forfeited bail bond or proceedings on a forfeited bond given in connection with
an appeal from a judgment or conviction in the circuit court of Pickens county, or the district
court of Pickens county, filed in or arising in the circuit court of Pickens county, or the district
court of Pickens county, or brought by appeal, certiorari or otherwise to the circuit court of
Pickens county, or the district court of Pickens county, which costs shall be collected as other
costs in such cases are collected by the clerk, or ex officio clerk, of said courts or the register of
the circuit court of Pickens county, as the case may be. Such fees, when collected by the clerks or
other collection officers of such court, shall be paid into the county fund to be administered
jointly by the sheriff and county commission for salaries, equipment and other expenses of the
sheriff's department.
The provisions of this constitutional amendment shall be retroactive to April 19, 1982, and any
fees or costs collected up to and including the amount of &dollar;10.00 per action filed and the
revenues therefrom expended pursuant to Act No. 82-291 of the 1982 regular session and Act
No. 83-542 of the 1983 regular session of the Alabama legislature are hereby ratified, and no
further enabling legislation shall be necessary for the execution of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 523 523.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 523 RATIFIED 1990

Fee on Disposal of Out-of-State Solid Waste in St. Clair County.
The St. Clair county governing body shall levy and impose a fee of not less than sixty dollars per
ton on out-of-state solid waste, as defined by general law, disposed of at any commercial disposal
site in the county. Said governing body is hereby authorized to implement such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary to impose and collect such disposal fees and the proceeds of
such fees shall be deposited in the county treasury to be expended for the general operations of
the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 524 524.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 524 RATIFIED 1990

Validation of Court Charges in Tuscaloosa County.
All general laws, local laws, population based laws and other laws heretofore enacted by the
legislature and which are in effect on November 1, 1989, pertaining to or applicable to
Tuscaloosa county; including but not limited to Act 80-618 of the 1980 Regular Session (Acts of
1980, p. 1054), as amended by Act 87-399 of the 1987 Regular Session (Acts of 1987, p. 570),
Act 80-780 of the 1980 Regular Session (Acts of 1980, p. 1615), as amended by Act 81-1052 of
the 1981 2nd Special Session (Acts of 1981 Special Sessions, p. 298), Act 79-751 of the 1979
Regular Session (Acts of 1979, p. 1336), as now codified in the Code of Alabama 1975, Sections
11-25-1 through 11-25-12, and Act 65 of the 1936 Special Session (Acts of 1936 Special
Session, p. 34), as amended by Act 1086 of the 1969 Regular Session (Acts of 1969, p. 2021);
which in whole or in part regulate costs and charges of courts are hereby in all things ratified,
approved, validated and confirmed as of the date of their enactment any provision or provisions
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 to the contrary notwithstanding. Any actions taken or
payments made in accordance with the provisions of said laws are hereby ratified, approved,
validated and confirmed. This amendment shall not be construed as prohibiting the legislature
from properly enacting a law to amend or repeal said laws. This amendment shall not be
construed to permit the operation of Act 79-751 of the 1979 Regular Session, as now codified in
the Code of Alabama 1975 and Act 65 of the 1936 Special Session as amended at the same time
unless said joint operation is otherwise authorized by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 525 525.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 525 RATIFIED 1990

Ratification of Public School Taxes.
Any provision of the Constitution of Alabama 1901, as amended, to the contrary
notwithstanding, all ad valorem taxes for public school or education purposes in the state of
Alabama which have been approved by a majority vote of the appropriate electorate prior to
March 1, 1990, and the levy and collection thereof from the date of the initial levy thereof, are
hereby authorized, ratified and confirmed regardless of any statutory or constitutional defects,
mistakes, errors or ambiguities in the authorization or levy thereof or the election thereon, or in
any act of the legislature with respect thereto; provided, however, that the authorization,
ratification and confirmation effected by this amendment shall not be applicable to any tax the
validity of which is being challenged in appropriate judicial proceedings in any proper court on
the date the act proposing this amendment is adopted.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 526 526.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 526 RATIFIED 1990

Court Costs in Cherokee County.
In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized, and notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Constitution, including without limitation sections 96, 104 and 105 of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, there shall be an additional $20.00 fee assessed
and taxed as costs on each civil and criminal case hereafter filed in the circuit court, district
court, probate court or any municipal court in Cherokee county. The aforementioned $20.00
fee/assessment in no way can be waived by any court unless all other fees, assessments, costs,
fines and/or charges associated with said case are waived. Such fees, when collected by the clerks
or other collection officers of such courts, shall be paid into the general fund of Cherokee county
to be used for the planning, designing, construction, financing and operation of a new county jail.
This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 527 527.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 527 RATIFIED 1990

Fire Protection Tax in Choctaw County.
In Choctaw county there is hereby levied, commencing on October 1 following ratification of this
amendment, in addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the
Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of one mill. The fire protection tax levied
herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal property assessed by affected property
owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of Choctaw county, Alabama, and shall be
assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in the county. The amount collected each year
from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be set aside in a special fund to be distributed by
the county commission to volunteer fire departments in the county and the Choctaw County
Association of Volunteer Fire Departments. The revenues generated from this tax will be
distributed to all volunteer fire departments meeting the minimum standards and the Choctaw
County Association of Volunteer Fire Departments, Inc. in equal shares on a semi-annual basis
on February 1st and August 1st of each year. Prior to any distribution of funds, there must be
prepared and filed with the Choctaw County Commission a map setting out the various volunteer
fire departments and every portion of Choctaw county must be assigned or designated to one of
the respective volunteer fire departments so that every citizen in Choctaw county has fire
protection from a designated volunteer fire department. No funds shall be disbursed to any
volunteer fire department until the county has full and complete coverage for all citizens. The
funds shall be audited annually by the examiners of public accounts or a qualified licensed and
registered certified public accountant as to the fire protection taxes received by the county
commission, as to the funds appropriated by it and as to how the funds are expended in each
volunteer fire department and to be certain that all taxes received are disbursed on an equal basis
to the district and countywide organization and to further audit how the funds are expended by
each department and the countywide association.
The county commission is further authorized to enter into agreements with volunteer fire
departments within such county for fire protection and services.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 528 528.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 528 RATIFIED 1990

Fire Districts and Fire Protection Tax in Conecuh County.
The Conecuh County Commission and the Conecuh County Fire Control Association are hereby
authorized in their discretion to establish fire districts within the geographical boundaries of
Conecuh county. The boundaries of such fire districts may be rearranged at the discretion of the
county commission and the Conecuh County Fire Control Association as they deem necessary,
from time to time, to maximize fire protection services in the county. The county commission
and the Conecuh County Fire Control Association may use the corporate limits of the various
towns and municipalities in the county as boundaries for fire districts. In such situations, such
town or municipal fire district shall have its own volunteer fire department functioning within its
boundaries. Each fire district established in an area located outside of the corporate limits of a
town or municipality shall likewise have its own volunteer fire department functioning strictly
within its district boundaries.
The county commission and the Conecuh County Fire Control Association are further authorized
to enter into agreements with volunteer fire departments within such county for fire protection
and services.
Commencing with the levy for the tax year for which taxes will become due and payable on
October 1, 1991, there is hereby levied, in addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be
hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a fire protection tax of three mills.
The fire protection tax levied herein shall be based upon the value of real and personal property
assessed by affected property owners, as shown on the records of the tax assessor of Conecuh
county, Alabama, and shall be assessed and collected as are all ad valorem taxes in the county.
The amount collected each year from assessment of this fire protection tax shall be paid into the
county general fund and used in furtherance of fire protection and for rescue squads within the
affected area. Prior to the levy of the fire protection tax in said county, there shall be submitted to
the electors of said county, at a special election called for that purpose in said county, the
question of whether the said tax shall be levied, and the said tax shall be authorized at such
election by a majority of the qualified electors within the said county who vote at such election.
Elections on the question of the levy of a fire protection tax in said county may be held at any
time and from time to time, provided, that if any such election held after the ratification of this
amendment the proposal to levy the tax so submitted should be defeated then the proposal may
not be submitted at another election held in said county within two years from the last election
held under this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 529 529.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 529 RATIFIED 1990

Validation of Court Charges in Lee County.
All general laws, local laws, population based laws and other laws heretofore enacted by the
legislature and which are in effect on January 1, 1990, pertaining to or applicable to Lee county,
which in whole or in part regulate costs and charges of courts are hereby in all things ratified,
approved, validated and confirmed as of the date of their enactment any provision or provisions
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 to the contrary notwithstanding. Any actions taken or
payments made in accordance with the provisions of said laws are hereby ratified, approved,
validated and confirmed. This amendment shall not be construed as prohibiting the legislature
from properly enacting a law to amend or repeal said laws.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 530 530.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 530 RATIFIED 1990

Court Costs in Macon County.
In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized to be collected, the county
commission of Macon county is authorized to assess a fee not to exceed $30.00 upon the
privilege of filing any initial complaint in all civil and criminal cases filed in any court, in the
county, as well as a fee not to exceed $5.00 for the service of all pleadings and other documents
in connection with any such action. All such fees shall be paid into the general fund and shall be
applied exclusively for payment of the cost of the planning, construction and equipping of a new
county jail, or for the payment of the principal of and interest on any bonds, warrants or other
obligations issued by or on behalf of the county to finance the costs of a new jail, as well as the
expenses of issuance of any such bonds, warrants or other obligations. When the aforesaid costs
of planning, constructing and equipping a new county jail shall be fully paid or when all such
bonds, warrants or other obligations have been retired, whichever last occurs, the additional fee
authorized by this amendment to be collected shall no longer be collected. Provided, however, no
additional fee provided herein shall be collected until 30 days after the county commission has
signed a contract and or contracts for the construction of a new jail and construction has actually
begun.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 531 531.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 531 RATIFIED 1990

Municipal Jurisdiction in Madison County.
In Madison county, no police jurisdiction nor any planning or zoning regulation of a municipality
located wholly or partially within Madison county shall extend beyond the corporate limits of the
municipality.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 532 532.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 532 RATIFIED 1990

Fire Fighting Districts and Services in Mobile County.
The county commission of Mobile county is hereby authorized to establish and maintain fire
fighting districts within Mobile county. The county commission is further authorized to enter into
agreements with volunteer fire departments within the county for fire protection and services.
The county commission is hereby empowered to set fees for fire protection and to prescribe the
manner of collection and distribution of such fees. The fire fighting districts herein authorized
shall not include any corporate municipality of Mobile county unless such municipality requests
through resolution of its governing body to be included in such fire fighting program. Any act
heretofore enacted regarding said Mobile county fire fighting districts is hereby ratified and
confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 533 533.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 533 RATIFIED 1990

Talladega County Budget.

The Talladega County Commission shall prepare and adopt an estimate of the income of the
county for the fiscal year beginning on October 1 of the current calendar year for all public funds
under its supervision and control, and to estimate for the same fiscal year the expense of
operations and to appropriate for the various purposes the respective amounts that are to be used
for each of such purposes; provided that the appropriations so made shall not exceed the
estimated total income of the county available for appropriations. The county commission shall
restrict allotments to prevent an overdraft or deficit in any fiscal year for which appropriations
are made by prorating without discrimination against any county program, the available revenues
among the various county programs. Such appropriations shall be payable in such proportion as
the total sum of all appropriations bears to the total revenues estimates as available in each of the
fiscal years.
A refusal to perform any requirement of this amendment or an improper or illegal performance of
any requirement of this amendment shall subject the offender to a penalty of $250.00 to be
recovered in an action instituted in the circuit court of Talladega county and shall subject such
offender to impeachment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 534 534.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1990 ***

AMENDMENT 534 RATIFIED 1990

Construction, Repair, etc., of Public Roads, Bridges, etc., in Talladega County.
The legislature shall, by general or local law, provide for the construction, maintenance and
repair of public roads, highways, bridges and ferries in Talladega county on the basis of the
county as a unit, without regard to any district or beat lines.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 535 535.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 535 RATIFIED 1992

Election of Board of Education of City of Tallassee.
This legislature may by local act provide for the election of the members of the board of
education of the City of Tallassee in Elmore and Tallapoosa Counties.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 536 536.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 536 RATIFIED 1992

Distribution of Oil and Gas Revenues by Escambia County Commission.
The Escambia County commission shall distribute oil and gas revenues as provided in this
amendment.
1 The Escambia County Oil and Gas Severance Trust, established by Act No. 84-576, H. 664 of
the 1984 Regular Session (Acts 1984, p. 1198), its corpus and income shall be continued as
provided by Sections 1 and 2 of that act.
2 The members of the Escambia County commission, or their successors in office, shall
constitute the trustees of the trust. Provided, however, the members of the Escambia County
commission, or their successors in office, may in their discretion, appoint one or more trustees or
escrow agents for the trust which trustees or escrow agents shall be trust companies or national or
state banks having powers of a trust company within or without the State of Alabama. The
trustees shall invest the corpus of the trust only in direct general obligations of, or obligations the
payment of the principal of and interest on which are conditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
the United States of America. Provided, however, that, notwithstanding any legal limitation that
might otherwise be applicable, the trustees shall further have the authority in their discretion to
invest such trust fund in certificates of deposit of any savings and loan associations or banks
whether federally or state chartered whose principal office is located in the state, provided that
such funds so invested are fully secured by pledge of eligible United States treasury securities.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 537 537.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 537 RATIFIED 1992

Election of Board of Education of City of Attalla.
The legislature may by local act provide for the election of the members of the board of
education of the City of Attalla in Etowah County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 538 538.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 538 RATIFIED 1992

Incorporation of Tom Bevill Reservoir Management Area Authority.
Any provision of the Constitution of Alabama or amendments thereto to the contrary
notwithstanding, the legislature by general or local law may provide for and authorize in Fayette
County the incorporation of a public corporation as a political subdivision of the state to be
named The Tom Bevill Reservoir Management Area Authority, for the development of that
portion of North River in Fayette County and within the boundaries of The Tom Bevill Reservoir
Management Area, its tributaries and watershed area, for the purposes of water conservation and
supply, dam construction and reservoir development, for industrial development, flood control,
navigation, irrigation, public recreation and related purposes. Any such law may provide for the
composition of the board of directors of the authority and specify the powers and duties of the
authority and its board of directors, may authorize the authority to investigate the resources of
The Tom Bevill Reservoir Management Area, and to determine and implement the requirements
for its full development and control, and to carry out a unified comprehensive program of
resource development, together with other powers to effectuate the foregoing objective, may
authorize the authority to acquire land and interests in land by purchase, construction, lease,
condemnation or otherwise, and to hold, manage and sell such land and interests therein, may
make provisions respecting the establishment and revision of rates, fees and charges for services
rendered by the authority, may provide for the issuance by the authority for any of its corporate
purposes of interest-bearing revenue bonds and notes payable solely out of the revenues of the
authority or out of the revenues of any particular facilities and other property of the authority,
without regard to the specific facilities and other property with respect to which such bonds and
notes may have been issued, may provide further for certain taxes, may provide that such bonds
and notes shall constitute negotiable instruments, may provide that such bonds and notes may be
secured by a pledge of the revenues from which they are payable, by contracts binding the
authority for the proper application of its revenues and the proceeds of such bonds and notes and
by a nonforeclosable mortgage or deed of trust or statutory mortgage lien on the facilities and
other property out of the revenues from which such bonds and notes are payable, and may
provide that bonds and notes of the authority may be issued under a trust indenture, may provide
for constructive notice of any such statutory mortgage lien, may authorize and make provisions
respecting the assumption by the authority of obligations respecting facilities and other property
acquired by the authority, may provide for the use of the proceeds of bonds and notes issued by
the authority and provide for the refunding by the issuance of bonds and notes of the authority of
bonds and notes theretofore issued or obligations theretofore assumed by it, may provide that
bonds and notes issued and contracts entered into by the authority pursuant to the act shall not
constitute or create a debt of the state or of any county, municipality or other political subdivision
of the state, may authorize the Fayette County commission and the municipalities located within
Fayette County to contribute money to the authority, without the necessity of an election and with
or without consideration therefor, may exempt from all taxation in this state, the authority, its
property, corporate activities, income, revenues, bonds and notes, the income from its bonds and
notes, and conveyances, leases and mortgages and deeds of trust to which the authority is a party,
and exempt the authority from payment of certain charges to judges of probate, it grants to the
authority the power to levy and collect within the boundaries of the management area certain
excise taxes, sales taxes, and ad valorem taxes, may provide that the authority shall have zoning
power within the boundaries of the management area, may provide that the authority shall be
exempted from regulation and supervision by the public service commission and the state
department of finance, may provide for the use of public roads in the state by the authority, and
may provide for certain annual reports by the authority.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 539 539.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 539 RATIFIED 1992

Business License Taxes in Jefferson County.
In order to allow for the orderly and efficient collection of municipal business license taxes in
Jefferson County with respect to corporations, firms, brokers, agents and others in the business of
buying, selling, leasing or representing others in the purchase, sale or lease of real property in
Jefferson County, the legislature may, by local law, provide for the imposition and collection of
such taxes as follows:
a Any city or town within Jefferson County may fix and collect licenses pursuant to Sections 11-
51-90 and 11-51-91 of the Code of Alabama 1975, as amended, for any business, trade or
profession relating to the buying, selling or renting of real estate on commission in Jefferson
County if such licensee maintains its principal place of business in the corporate limits or police
jurisdiction of that municipality.
b Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter, in
addition to the taxes, if any, imposed under a. above, every corporation, firm, broker, agent or
other person or entity engaged in the business of buying, selling, managing, leasing or renting of
real estate on commission in Jefferson County shall pay an annual business license tax at a rate to
be set by the legislature for the privilege of engaging in such business in every other city or town
in Jefferson County. Such tax shall be collected by the Revenue Director of Jefferson County and
shall be distributed by the Revenue Director of Jefferson County to each city or town within
Jefferson County on a pro rata basis based on population. The Revenue Director of Jefferson
County shall be entitled to an administrative fee for administering this tax at a rate to be set by
the legislature; such fee to be added to the license tax collected hereunder.
c Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter,
except for the licenses permitted or mandated under a. and b. above, no other privilege license
tax shall be imposed under Sections 11-51-90 and 11-51-91 of the Code of Alabama 1975, by
any city or town within Jefferson County on corporations, firms, brokers, agents or other persons
or entities engaged in the business of buying, selling, managing, leasing or renting of real estate
on commission in Jefferson County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 540 540.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 540 RATIFIED 1992

Fees, Commissions, Allowances and Salaries of Macon County Officers.
The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general, special or local laws, fix, regulate
and alter the fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be charged or received by the judge of
probate and other county officers of Macon County, and may put such officers on a salary basis
and provide for the operation of their offices on such basis.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 541 541.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 541 RATIFIED 1992

Investments of Assets of Class 2 Municipality Police and Fire Fighters Pension Plans.
The capital and income from any Policemen's and Fire Fighters' Pension Fund for a Class 2
municipality, may be invested in such kinds of investments and in accordance with such
conditions as shall, from time to time, be authorized by law for the investment of the Alabama
Heritage Trust Fund and the Alabama Trust Fund or any of the trust funds of either the Teachers'
Retirement System of Alabama or the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 542 542.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1992 ***

AMENDMENT 542 RATIFIED 1992

Bingo Games in St. Clair County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in St. Clair County, subject to the
provisions of any resolution or ordinance by the county governing body or the governing bodies
of the respective cities and towns within their respective jurisdictions as provided by law
regulating such operation. The said governing bodies shall have the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations for the issuance of permits or licenses and for operation of bingo games within
their respective jurisdictions; provided, however, that said governing bodies must insure
compliance pursuant to said law and the following provisions:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian; nor shall any person under the age of 19 be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo;
(2) No bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit organization unless such
organization shall have been in existence for at least 24 months immediately prior to the issuance
of the permit or license;
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization operating the bingo game. If the premises is leased, the rate or rental shall not be
based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from the operation of bingo games;
(4) No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association
or corporation to have said individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of
the nonprofit organization, nor shall said nonprofit organization pay consulting fees to any
individual or entity for any services performed in relation to the operation or conduct of a bingo
game;
(5) A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name or allow its identity to be used by any other
person or entity in the operating or advertising of a bingo game in which said nonprofit
organization is not directly and solely operating said bingo game;
(6) Prizes given by any qualified nonprofit organization for the playing of bingo games shall not
exceed the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value, set by the legislature, during any bingo
session. The legislature shall set a maximum amount for any calendar week;
(7) By whatever name or composition thereof, no person or organization shall take any expenses
for the operation of a bingo game except as permitted by law.
(8) A fee of $.10 (ten cents) shall be levied upon each bingo card sold pursuant to the provisions
of this amendment or pursuant to any local law. Said fee shall be collected by the nonprofit
organization who sold the bingo card and paid to the tax collector or revenue commissioner of St.
Clair County on a weekly basis. The tax collector or revenue commissioner shall place the
proceeds collected into the treasury of St. Clair County in a special fund. All funds collected shall
be expended by the county commission in the following manner:
40% (forty percent) of said funds shall be allocated to volunteer fire departments located in St.
Clair County;
30% (thirty percent) of said funds shall be allocated to senior citizens' programs and facilities;
20% (twenty percent) of said funds shall be allocated to youth recreation programs and facilities;
10% (ten percent) of said funds shall be allocated to the St. Clair County sheriff's department.
The tax collector or revenue commissioner of St. Clair County shall have authority to promulgate
necessary rules and regulations to implement the procedure for the collection of the fee
prescribed herein. The legislature, from time to time, may by local law alter the fee levied herein
and alter the method of allocating the proceeds of said fee.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 543 543.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 543 RATIFIED 1993

Acquisition, Maintenance and Protection of Unique Lands and Water Areas.
Section 1. Declaration of Purpose.
The Legislature of Alabama finds that Alabama is endowed with a rich diversity of natural areas
having unique ecological systems, plant and animal life, geological formations, wildlife habitats,
recreational values and scenic beauty. As a part of the continuing growth of the population and
the economic development of the state, it is necessary and desirable that certain lands and waters
be set aside, managed and preserved for use as state parks, nature preserves, recreation areas, and
wildlife management areas. In order to meet the State's outdoor recreation needs and to protect
the natural heritage of Alabama for the benefit of present and future generations, it is the policy
of the state to:
(a) Protect, manage, and enhance certain lands and waters of Alabama with full recognition that
this generation is a trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;
(b) Protect, to the fullest extent practicable, recreational lands and areas of unique ecological,
biological and geological importance; and
(c) Promote a proper balance among population growth, economic development, environmental
protection, and ecological diversity. Accordingly, there is hereby established the Alabama
Forever Wild Land Trust for the purpose of identifying, acquiring, managing, protecting and
preserving natural lands and waters that are of environmental or recreational importance.
Section 2. Definitions.
(1) "Alabama Trust Fund" means the irrevocable, permanent trust fund created by Amendment
450 to this Alabama Constitution of 1901.
(2) "Alabama Trust Fund Board" means the board of trustees of the Alabama Trust Fund as
established by Amendment 450 to this Alabama Constitution of 1901.
(3) "Appraised Value" means that price estimated in terms of money at which the property would
change hands between a willing and financially able buyer and a willing seller, neither being
under any compulsion to buy or sell.
(4) "Board" means the Board of Trustees of the Alabama Forever Wild Land Trust, as established
by Section 4 of this Amendment.
(5) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Alabama Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources or any other officer of the state who, by law, shall succeed to his
responsibilities.
(6) "Conservation Easement" means a right, whether or not stated in the form of restriction,
easement, covenant or condition, in any deed, will, or other instrument executed by or on behalf
of the owner of land providing for the retention of properties predominantly in their natural,
scenic, open or wooded condition, or as suitable habitat for fish and wildlife, or as recreational
lands.
(7) "Dedication" means the transfer to the state of an estate, interest, or right in a natural area to
fulfill the purposes of this Amendment.
(8) "Department" means the Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources or any
other department or agency of the state that, by law, shall succeed to its functions and
responsibilities.
(9) "Final Approval Committee" means a Committee, as established by Section 6 of this
Amendment, to be composed of the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives.
(10) "Forever Wild Land Trust" means the Alabama Forever Wild Land Trust created by this
Amendment.
(11) "Instrument of Dedication" means any written document by which an estate, interest, or right
in a natural area is formally dedicated as a natural area preserve.
(12) "Land" or "lands" means real property and any interests therein, including, but not limited
to, fee simple titles, ownership interests less than fee simple, leases, easements, licenses,
restrictions and use agreements. Such property and interests therein shall also include wetlands,
estuarine areas and submerged lands and the waters thereon.
(13) "Natural Area" means any property, whether publicly or privately owned, (a) that retains or
has generally reestablished its natural character, though it need not be completely natural and
undisturbed, or (b) which is important in preserving rare or vanishing flora and fauna, native
ecological systems, fish and wildlife habitats, geological, natural, scenic or similar features of
scientific, recreational, or educational value benefitting the citizens of the state.
(14) "Natural Area Preserve" means a natural area that has been dedicated pursuant to Section 12
of this Amendment.
(15) "State" means the State of Alabama.
(16) "Stewardship" means the maintenance, protection, operation, enhancement, and
management of lands acquired for the Forever Wild Land Trust.
(17) "Trustee" means a member of the Board of Trustees of the Forever Wild Land Trust.
(18) "Trust income" means the net income received by the state from the investment and
reinvestment of all assets of the Alabama Trust Fund, determined in accordance with the
provisions of Amendment Number 450 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
(19) In dividing the State into geographical regions:
(20) "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, trust, partnership, or association.
Section 3. Establishment of Forever Wild Land Trust, Lead Management Agency, and Categories
of Lands to be Acquired.
(a) For the purposes set forth in this Amendment, there is hereby established the Alabama
Forever Wild Land Trust, which shall be a permanent trust to be funded and administered in
accordance with the provisions of this Amendment. Title to all properties acquired for the
Forever Wild Land Trust shall be vested in the Alabama Trust Fund for the State of Alabama.
The Department shall serve as the lead management agency with respect to all lands acquired and
shall have the responsibility of providing to the Board administrative support as necessary.
(b) In order to protect the natural heritage and diversity of Alabama for future generations, the
state, acting through the Forever Wild Land Trust, will acquire lands, the title of which shall be
held in the Alabama Trust Fund, to ensure their protection and use for conservational,
educational, recreational or aesthetic purposes. These lands may include, but shall not be limited
to, the following: Wetlands, river corridors, lakes and streams, and the banks and shores thereof,
springs, riverine, montane, plain, coastal, and other kinds of terrain, geological systems, areas
supporting threatened or endangered species, sensitive and ecologically important lands, unusual
habitat types, forests and woodlands, fish and wildlife habitats, wilderness areas, unusual
assemblages of wildflowers, natural lands, waters or wetlands that will provide public hunting
and fishing, lands having other distinctive natural or recreational characteristics, and lands that
will constitute suitable additions to the state's system of parks and fish and wildlife management
areas.
(c) Property purchased with Forever Wild Land Trust moneys or which become part of the trust
property through dedication or by some other means shall be subject to the condemnation of
easements, rights-of-way and other necessary rights and estates in property by or on behalf of
corporations that construct, own or operate railroads, pipelines for the transportation of oil, gas,
fuel or water, hydroelectric or other electric generating facilities and electric lines, telephone
transmission lines and other communication facilities, or any other public utility or method of
transportation which serves, or is intended to serve, the public convenience and necessity to the
same extent and under the same conditions that such lands, if owned by private persons, would
be subject to condemnation by such corporations under federal or state law now in effect or
hereafter enacted. No use of any such lands as determined by the Board shall constitute a use
thereof for public purposes that will require proof of actual necessity by any corporation seeking
to condemn such lands.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Amendment, no property shall be acquired for
the Alabama Trust Fund or with moneys from the Forever Wild Land Trust through
condemnation or the use of eminent domain.
(e) No funds or assets of the Forever Wild Land Trust derived from any source shall be expended
or used to construct or improve buildings, structures or facilities used for human lodging, feeding
or entertainment, including, without limitation thereto, hotels and other lodging facilities,
restaurants, convention centers and meeting halls, golf courses, dancing or meeting pavilions,
tennis courts, recreational dams, exhibition halls, and similar facilities that have a principal
purpose not related to the stewardship of properties of the Forever Wild Land Trust, the title of
which is held in the Alabama Trust Fund, in their natural state; provided, however, that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the expenditure of funds allocated to the
Stewardship Account for the construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, culverts, drainage
facilities, hiking trails, boat launching ramps and other improvements located on Trust Lands to
provide reasonable public access thereto, for the construction and maintenance of visitors' centers
and facilities, interpretive displays and other facilities for the guidance and education of visitors,
for the construction and maintenance of facilities and the acquisition of equipment necessary or
appropriate in connection with the performance of stewardship responsibilities (including
housing for custodial personnel), or for any other purpose reasonably related to the stewardship
responsibilities of the Board.
Section 4. Establishment of Board of Trustees of the Alabama Forever Wild Land Trust.
(a) There is hereby established the Board of Trustees of the Alabama Forever Wild Land Trust,
which shall consist of fifteen voting members as follows:
(1) One member shall be the Commissioner of the Department who shall also serve as Chairman
of the Board.
(2) One member shall be the State Forester.
(3) Three members which shall be appointed by the Alabama Commission on Higher Education
from Departments of Biology, Zoology, Environmental Sciences and Wildlife Science from
eligible four-year institutions of higher education in Alabama. An eligible institution shall consist
of a public or private four-year college or university, offering a degree in biology or one of its
divisions, and having an enrollment of at least 1500 undergraduate students. There shall be one
professional biologist appointed to the Board from eligible institutions in the Northern District of
the state, one from such institutions in the Central District of the state, and one from such
institutions in the Southern District of the state, as said districts are defined in Section 2 hereof.
Each eligible institution in the appropriate geographical region shall be entitled to submit one
nomination to the Alabama Commission on Higher Education for the professional biologist
trustee from that region on the Board.
(4) One member shall be the Executive Director of the Marine Environmental Sciences
Consortium.
(5) There shall be three members from each of the three geographical regions of the state as
defined in Section 2 of this Amendment, as follows. Provided, however, at least one appointee by
the Governor, at least one appointee by the Lieutenant Governor and at least one appointee by the
Speaker of the House of Representatives shall be black. If none of the recommending groups
recommend a black to the appointing authority, said appointing authority shall appoint a black on
his or her own initiative.
(A) One member from the Northern District shall be appointed by the Governor from a list of
names presented by Group A and shall serve an initial term of six years. One member from the
Northern District shall be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor from a list of names presented
by Group B and shall serve an initial term of four years. One member from the Northern District
shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from a list of names presented
by Group C and shall serve an initial term of two years.
(B) One member from the Central District shall be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor from a
list of names presented by Group C and shall serve an initial term of six years. One member from
the Central District shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from a list
of names presented by Group A and shall serve an initial term of four years. One member from
the Central District shall be appointed by the Governor from a list of names presented by Group
B and shall serve an initial term of two years.
(C) One member from the Southern District shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives from a list of names presented by Group B and shall serve an initial term of six
years. One member from the Southern District shall be appointed by the Governor from a list of
names presented by Group C and shall serve an initial term of four years. One member from the
Southern District shall be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor from a list of names presented
by Group A and shall serve an initial term of two years.
(D) Any successor appointments and appointments to vacancies shall be made in the same
manner as described in subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) above, and members appointed after the
initial term of that office has expired shall serve for six-year terms, except that no member shall
serve consecutive six-year terms.
(E) It is the intent of this Amendment that the eastern and western areas of the three geographical
regions of the state shall be represented on the Board of Trustees.
(6) Each person appointed to the Board shall be and remain an Alabama resident and shall have a
demonstrated knowledge of and commitment to land acquisition for the purposes of conservation
and recreation. Organizations making recommendations to the appointing officials shall be
Alabama organizations or the Alabama chapter of national organizations in order to ensure that
the decisions affecting Alabama's future are made by Alabama residents.
The recommending groups are composed as follows:
(A) "Group A" shall consist of non-profit organizations, each having its principal programs
extending generally throughout the State, whose demonstrated primary concerns are
environmental protection for the state and its citizens and non-consumptive use and preservation
of natural areas, and whose membership exceeds 750 individual residents of Alabama, including,
but not limited to, The Nature Conservancy of Alabama, the Alabama Audubon Council
(comprising the chapters in Alabama of the National Audubon Society), The Alabama
Conservancy, the Alabama Chapter of the Sierra Club, and their respective successor
organizations.
(B) "Group B" shall consist of business, industry, trade associations and professional
organizations, each having its principal programs extending generally throughout the state, and
having a demonstrated concern for balancing economic growth with protection for the
environment and increased recreational opportunities, including, but not limited to, the Business
Council of Alabama, the Alabama Forestry Association, Alabama Forest Resources Center, the
Alabama Farmers Federation, the Petroleum Council of Alabama, the Association of County
Commissions of Alabama, and their respective successor organizations.
(C) "Group C" shall consist of non-profit organizations, each having its principal programs
extending generally throughout the state, whose demonstrated primary purposes are to promote
hunting, fishing, camping or other compatible recreational activities or conservation for such
purposes, and whose membership exceeds 750 individual residents of Alabama, including, but
not limited to, the Alabama Wildlife Federation, the Alabama State Advisory Council of Ducks
Unlimited, Bowhunters of Alabama Inc., the Coastal Land Trust, Inc., the Gulf Coast
Conservation Association, the Tennessee Valley Waterfowl Association, the Alabama Rifle and
Pistol Association, the Alabama Chapter of the Safari Club International (whether or not those
named organizations meet the membership requirement), and their respective successor
organizations.
(D) In order to qualify as a recommending organization, each organization not specifically listed
in this section must file with the Secretary of State and with the named organizations within the
same "group", by January 1 preceding the date of expiration of term of office of Trustees
hereunder, a written statement of intent to nominate persons to serve on the Board. This
statement must include a request for designation of the "group" within which the organization
plans to nominate Trustees and information demonstrating that the organization qualifies to make
such nominations. It shall also include a copy of the organization's charter, stating its purpose.
Should the Secretary of State or any of the named organizations within the same group oppose in
writing the eligibility of the new organization to nominate members of the Board or the
designation of the "group" within which it proposes to nominate members, then the Secretary of
State shall determine the eligibility of the applying organization to submit nominations for
membership on the Board and, if determined eligible, the "group" within which it shall submit
nominations. In making this decision, the Secretary of State shall give due consideration to the
views submitted to him by the organizations in the "group" within which the new organization
proposes to submit nominations. An organization, together with its affiliates, cannot recommend
names to the appointing officials as a member of more than one "group".
Each organization submitting nominations may submit, to the appropriate appointing official for
that position on the Board, the names of not more than two of its members who have the
qualifications to serve in the position for which they are being nominated. In the event that no
organization within a group recommends names to the appointing official, then that official may
appoint a Trustee from that group solely of his own choice.
(E) Terms of office of the initial Trustees shall begin on the January 1 following ratification of
this Amendment, or on the first day of the third month following said ratification, whichever
shall first occur. Terms of office of successor Trustees shall begin and end on anniversaries of
that date. In the case of the initial appointments of Trustees, nominations shall be made to the
appropriate appointing officials not later than one month after ratification of this Amendment,
and appointments by said officials shall be made by the date of beginning of the initial Trustees'
terms of office. Nominations of successor Trustees shall be made to the appropriate appointing
officials not later than two months prior to the expiration of the Trustees' terms of office, and
said officials shall appoint new Trustees within 30 calendar days after the expiration of said
terms. In the event a Trustee resigns or dies, or otherwise vacates his office, the Commissioner or
the Secretary of State shall promptly notify the appropriate nominating organizations and shall
publish notice of such vacancy once a week for three successive weeks in three newspapers of
regional circulation in this state with a request for new nominations from any group that may
qualify to do so under the provisions of this Amendment. Nominations for a replacement Trustee
shall be made to the appointing official during the 30 calendar days following such death,
resignation or other vacation of office, and the appointing official shall appoint a replacement
Trustee not later than the end of the next succeeding 30 calendar days thereafter. In the event the
appropriate appointing official fails to make an initial appointment or an appointment within said
30-day periods for appointment after expiration of term of office or after death, resignation or
other vacation of office, the right to make an appointment to fill that vacancy shall fall to the next
appointing official in line of rotation of the Governor to the Lieutenant Governor to the Speaker
of the House (with the Governor then to follow the Speaker); and, if that successor appointing
official fails to make such appointment within 30 days, then the right to make the appointment
shall fall to the next succeeding appointing official, all to the end that there will, as nearly as
possible, always be a full complement of Trustees on the Board. Trustees appointed to fill a
vacancy other than by reason of expiration of term of office shall serve the remainder of the
unexpired term of the Trustee being replaced.
Section 5. Rights, Powers, and Duties of the Board.
(a) The Board is to meet at least quarterly each year for the transaction of its business and to
review the progress of the Forever Wild Land Trust. It shall review written requests from state
agencies, private organizations, and private citizens proposing that certain properties or interests
therein be acquired. For purposes of establishing a quorum, there must be present at least three-
fifths ( 3/5 ) of the members of the Board then in office at any Board meeting in order to conduct
business; provided, however, that in absence of a quorum, the members present, by majority
vote, may adjourn the meeting from time to time until a quorum shall attend. Any Board action
or recommendation must be approved by at least three-fifths ( 3/5 ) of the members of the entire
Board then in office, unless specified otherwise in this Amendment. Using its own knowledge
and expertise, as well as the knowledge and expertise of the scientific community and state and
federal agencies, the Board shall adopt a priority list of properties to be considered for
acquisition. Recognizing that real estate transactions must involve willing sellers and may
involve complicated procedures that could affect the availability of property, the Department
shall, to the extent practicable, follow the directions of the Board in acquiring lands or waters.
Provided, however, the Forever Wild Land Trust may only purchase or acquire an interest in
property from the priority list of properties adopted by the Board.
(b) In addition to the site-specific management and allowable use guidelines referred to in
Section 9, the Board may recommend to the Department rules, regulations and management
criteria, which the Board feels would be beneficial to carrying out the goals and purposes of this
Amendment.
(c) The Board shall assist the Department in developing and maintaining an inventory of areas
and sites which through acquisition become state natural and/or recreational areas and shall make
public as desirable information regarding their location, management, regulation, and permissible
public uses.
(d) The Board shall prepare and submit to the Governor and the state Legislature, on or before
February 1 of each year, a report which shall describe and account for all expenditures and
acquisitions by the Forever Wild Land Trust for the preceding fiscal year, as well as plans for the
current fiscal year. The Board shall present this annual report to the public at a public meeting to
be held within ten days after February 1 of each year. The public meeting shall be an informal
process to present information on the Forever Wild Land Trust to the public and give the public
an opportunity to have a dialogue with the Board regarding its future plans and operations.
(e) Before purchasing or acquiring any interest in lands with moneys from the Forever Wild Land
Trust, the Board, acting through the Commissioner, or the Commissioner on his own initiative,
shall obtain at least two appraisals from certified real estate appraisers. In no event shall the
Board expend more than the "appraised value", as defined in Section 2 of this Amendment, in
purchasing such lands; provided, however, that by affirmative vote of at least three-fourths ( 3/4 )
of the members of the Board, the Board may expend up to 125 percent of the appraised value for
such purchase where such action is necessary to accomplish the purposes and goals of this
Amendment.
(f) The Board may assume indebtedness on behalf of the Forever Wild Land Trust that may be
owed with respect to real or personal property given, donated, contributed or devised to the
Forever Wild Land Trust, or that may be secured by a mortgage, deed of trust or security interest
covering such property, and to agree to pay such indebtedness from current assets or future
revenues of the Forever Wild Land Trust; provided that the present value of all installments of
principal and of interest on such indebtedness at the time of the assumption thereof, determined
in accordance with accepted principles and using a discount rate equal to the rate of interest
payable on such indebtedness, shall be less than 80% of the fair market value of such property as
determined by an active public market for such property or an appraisal performed by an
independent, professionally qualified appraiser.
(g) The Board may contract for the purchase of tracts or parcels of land in which the purchase
price shall be payable in future installments, together with such rate of interest on the unpaid
balance of such purchase price as the Board shall determine to be reasonable, and to secure the
payment of such installments, together with the interest thereon, by purchase money mortgages
on the land so acquired and by a pledge of future revenues committed to the Forever Wild Land
Trust, including, without limitation thereto, any portion of the trust income allocated to said trust
by Section 7 of this Amendment; provided that such installments shall in no event exceed 80% of
the fair market value of such property determined as set forth in the preceding subsection and
provided further that the total cumulative indebtedness assumed each year under the preceding
sub-section (f) together with the total cumulative indebtedness incurred each year by purchase
money mortgages as provided in this sub-section (g) shall be limited to no more than 25% of the
trust income allocated to said trust for the preceding year.
(h) The Board may enter into contracts with any person, nonprofit organization, corporation,
governmental entity or other entity concerning tracts or parcels of land that constitute desirable
acquisitions for the Forever Wild Land Trust pursuant to which such person, nonprofit
organization, corporation, governmental entity or other entity will agree to acquire and hold such
land, or to hold such land if theretofore acquired by such person, nonprofit organization,
corporation, governmental entity or other entity and to sell or donate such land to the Forever
Wild Land Trust at some future date, in the interim preserving and managing such land in its
natural state subject to such conditions, including the reimbursement of expenses, as the Board
shall deem advantageous for the ultimate acquisition and preservation of such land.
(i) The Board may sell, lease or exchange specific properties or interests therein acquired or held
by the Alabama Trust Fund for the Forever Wild Land Trust. Any such sale or exchange shall be
made at not less than the "appraised value", as defined in Section 2 of this Amendment;
provided, however, that by affirmative vote of at least three-fourths ( 3/4 ) of the members of the
Board, the Board may authorize and direct the Commissioner to sell or exchange property of said
trust for not less than 85 percent of the appraised value where such action is necessary to
accomplish the purposes and goals of the Amendment. All moneys received from any such sale
or lease shall be paid into the Forever Wild Land Trust.
(j) The Board shall establish a technical advisory committee, consisting of the State Forester, the
President of the Alabama Chapter of the Wildlife Society, the State Geologist, and any other
person whom the Board may desire to appoint, for the purpose of obtaining advice and assistance
in performing the Board's functions and duties under this Amendment.
(k) In addition, the Board is authorized at its discretion:
(1) to establish procedures relating to the confidentiality of information where necessary to
accomplish the purposes and goals of this Amendment;
(2) to cooperate or contract with any federal, state or local government agency, private
organization, or individual to accomplish any of the purposes and goals of this Amendment,
paying any reasonable fees or expenses in connection with such cooperation or contracts from
moneys held under or within the Forever Wild Land Trust;
(3) to recommend that moneys paid into the Forever Wild Land Trust be allowed to accumulate,
with only the income thereon being spent, or that the corpus or principal of the Forever Wild
Land Trust be expended in whole or in part;
(4) to do any and all things necessary to take advantage of federal, state, or local government or
private funds donated or obtainable through the use of the Forever Wild Land Trust; and
(5) to adopt, alter and repeal bylaws, regulations and rules in accordance with the provisions of
the Administrative Procedure Act for the regulation and conduct of its affairs and business in
accordance with the provisions of the Alabama Administrative Procedures Act.
(l) Members of the Board and the technical advisory committee shall be entitled to receive the
per diem allowance and travel expenses provided by law to state employees. These expense
payments shall be for the sole purpose of travel to and from their places of residence to meetings
and for travel involving official business of the Forever Wild Land Trust. Those members who
are state officials or employees shall serve without compensation or expense allowances other
than that to which they are otherwise entitled in the positions they hold.
(m) The Commissioner and the Department are hereby specifically authorized and empowered to
carry out all directions and recommendations of the Board made hereunder to accomplish the
purposes of the Forever Wild Land Trust and this Amendment.
Section 6. Final Approval Committee.
There is hereby established a Final Approval Committee to be composed of the Governor, the
Lieutenant Governor and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Before purchasing or leasing any property, or acquiring any interest therein, with any funds from
the Forever Wild Land Trust or selling any properties previously purchased from the Forever
Wild Land Trust, the Board shall submit to the Final Approval Committee a written proposal of
the purchase, lease, sale or acquisition of any other interest in property. Said proposal shall
include a legal description of the property to be purchased, leased or sold; the proposed purchase,
lease or sale price; and any additional terms of the sale, purchase, lease or other interest therein.
The Final Approval Committee shall approve or disapprove the proposal by a majority vote of
the full membership of said Committee within 30 days after the date of submission of the
proposal. Failure of the Committee to act within 30 days of submission shall constitute approval
of said proposal.
Section 7. Source of Funds.
(a) Beginning with the state's 1992-1993 fiscal year, there shall be allocated and paid into the
Forever Wild Land Trust the percentage of trust income earned from the Alabama Trust Fund
that would have been reinvested in the Alabama Trust Fund under Section 4(c) of Amendment
Number 450 to this Alabama Constitution of 1901. Notwithstanding Section 4(c) of Amendment
Number 450 to the Alabama Constitution of 1901, the percentage of trust income earned from
the Alabama Trust Fund shall be allocated to the Forever Wild Land Trust as follows:
(1) For the 1992-1993 fiscal year, four percent (4%) of the trust income earned from the Alabama
Trust Fund.
(2) For the 1993-1994 fiscal year, five percent (5%) of the trust income earned from the Alabama
Trust Fund.
(3) For the 1994-1995 fiscal year, six percent (6%) of the trust income earned from the Alabama
Trust Fund.
(4) For the 1995-1996 fiscal year, seven percent (7%) of the trust income earned from the
Alabama Trust Fund.
(5) For the 1996-1997 fiscal year, eight percent (8%) of the trust income earned from the
Alabama Trust Fund.
(6) For the 1997-1998 fiscal year, nine percent (9%) of the trust income earned from the Alabama
Trust Fund.
(7) Thereafter, ten percent (10%) of the trust income earned from the Alabama Trust Fund;
provided, however, that in no event shall such trust income paid to the Forever Wild Land Trust
exceed &dollar;15 million in any one fiscal year.
(b) The Alabama Trust Fund Board shall provide the Board of Trustees of the Forever Wild Land
Trust with advice and assistance in the investment of funds in the Forever Wild Land Trust.
(c) Title to the property acquired from funds in the Forever Wild Land Trust shall be held in the
Alabama Trust Fund for the State of Alabama. Provided, however, the Alabama Trust Fund
Board shall not have any responsibility for nor any control over the approving or disapproving of
the acquisition, disposition or use of any such property. Nothing in this Amendment or
Amendment 450 to this Alabama Constitution of 1901 shall be construed so as to require the
Alabama Trust Fund Board to have a fiduciary responsibility for the investment of Forever Wild
Land Trust funds or the production of income from property acquired by the Board of Trustees of
the Forever Wild Land Trust.
(d) The amounts allocated to the Forever Wild Land Trust shall be included in determining
whether the trust income received by the state from the Alabama Trust Fund equals or exceeds
$60,000,000 for the purposes of the County Government Capital Improvement Act (codified at
Sections 11-29-1 through 11-29-7 of the Code of Alabama, 1975, as amended) and the Municipal
Government Capital Improvement Act (codified at Sections 11-66-1 through 11-66-7 of the Code
of Alabama, 1975, as amended). In no event shall any provision hereof serve to decrease the
amount of income from the Alabama Trust Fund which is to be appropriated to the Municipal
Government Capital Improvement Fund and the County Government Capital Improvement Fund
under the above-referenced acts.
Section 8. Donations of Property.
Any person making a donation of any property or any interest therein, to the state for the
purposes of this Amendment, shall receive, irrespective of any other provisions of the income tax
laws of the state, twice the ordinary deduction for state income tax purposes for the taxable year
in which the property or interest is donated. Provided, however, the value of any such property or
interest therein, subject to this double deduction, shall be limited to the actual value of the
property, or any interest therein, donated to the state which shall not include any indebtedness,
encumbrances or liens assumed by the Forever Wild Land Trust or the value of any interests or
rights retained by the donor.
For the purposes of this section, the "actual value" of property shall be the appraised value for ad
valorem taxation purposes, averaged over the preceding five years.
Section 9. Stewardship Account.
The Alabama Trust Fund Board shall establish a separate account within the Alabama Trust Fund
to be known as the Forever Wild Land Trust Stewardship Account. When the Forever Wild Land
Trust acquires property or an interest in property pursuant to this Amendment, the Board of
Trustees of the Forever Wild Land Trust shall set aside an amount from the Forever Wild Land
Trust equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the appraised value of the land acquired, or the land
affected if less than a fee interest was acquired. The Alabama Trust Fund Board shall provide for
the investment of the Stewardship Account. The Board of Trustees of the Alabama Forever Wild
Land Trust may authorize the Department to expend any interest income generated from the
investment of funds within the Stewardship Account by the Alabama Trust Fund Board.
Provided, however, the Commissioner shall notify the Board of Trustees in writing if he
determines that the interest income projected to be generated from the Forever Wild Land Trust
Stewardship Account for the next fiscal year will be insufficient to properly manage property
acquired by the Forever Wild Land Trust. The Board may authorize by a three-fifths ( 3/5 ) vote
that funds within the corpus of the Forever Wild Land Trust Stewardship Account be expended
by the Department for management purposes for the next fiscal year, provided that funds from
the Stewardship Account may not be expended to purchase additional property or interests
therein. Within one year after the Forever Wild Land Trust acquires any properties pursuant to
this Amendment, the Board of Trustees of the Forever Wild Land Trust shall develop
management and allowable use guidelines which shall be followed by the Department in the
administration and stewardship of that piece of property. The Lands Division of the Department
shall, in accordance with such general directions as may be given by the Board of Trustees,
coordinate management of properties acquired pursuant to this Amendment and expenditures
from the Stewardship Account. All lands will be managed under the multiple-use management
principle; to insure that all resource values including recreation, hunting, fishing, boating, hiking,
aesthetics, soil, water, forest management and minerals are protected or enhanced. No use will be
allowed that is not compatible with the primary purpose for acquiring the land. In coordinating
such management within the Department, the Game and Fish Division of the Department shall
manage wildlife and fisheries programs; the State Parks Division of the Department shall manage
parks programs; the Lands Division of the Department shall manage natural areas programs
through its Natural Heritage Program; and the Lands Division of the Department shall manage
other activities and programs relating to Forever Wild Land Trust properties. The Forestry
Commission shall serve as consultant to the Department for the purpose of managing the forest
and forestry resources programs. Any income that may be generated from the property or from
any use of said property acquired through the Forever Wild Land Trust shall be treated as interest
income of the Alabama Trust Fund and shall accrue to the credit of the general fund of the State
of Alabama.
The right of the public to hunt and fish on the lands and easements acquired under the provisions
of this act shall not be abridged or restricted, subject to such rules, regulations, seasons and limits
as are established by the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
Section 10. Enforceability of Conservation Restrictions; Recordation; Acquisition and Disposal
of Interests.
(a) No conservation restriction or easement as defined in Section 2 of this Amendment held by
any governmental body shall be unenforceable on account of lack of privity of estate or contract
or lack of benefit to particular land or on account of the benefit being assignable to or being
assigned to any other governmental body with like purposes. All such restrictions and easements
shall be duly recorded and indexed in the manner of other conveyances of interests in land, and
shall describe the land subject to the restrictions or easements by adequate legal description or by
reference to a recorded plat showing its boundaries.
Such conservation restrictions are interests in land and may be acquired by any governmental
body which has power to acquire interests in land, in the same manner as it may acquire other
interests in land. Such a restriction or easement may be enforced by injunction or proceeding in
equity, and shall entitle the holder of it to enter the land in a reasonable manner and at reasonable
times to assure compliance. Such a restriction or easement may be released in whole or in part,
by the holder for such consideration, if any, as the holder may determine, in the same manner as
the holder may dispose of land or other interest in land, subject to such conditions as may have
been imposed at the time of creation of the restriction.
This section shall not be construed to imply that any restriction, easement, covenant or condition
which does not have the benefit of this section shall, on account of any provision hereof, be
unforceable. Nothing in this Amendment shall diminish the powers granted by any law to acquire
by purchase, gift, eminent domain or otherwise as restricting the use of an existing or future
easement, express or implied, in favor of any utility or other holder of an easement for public
purpose. The existence of conservation easements or restrictions shall not of itself be proof of
value as a measure of damages in any eminent domain proceedings.
(b) When a conservation restriction or easement is held by public body under the program
established by this Amendment, the real property subject thereto shall be assessed for taxation
purposes on the basis of the true cash value of the property or as otherwise provided by law, less
such reduction in value as may result from the granting of the conservation restriction or
easement. The value of the interest held by the public body shall be exempt from property
taxation to the same extent as other public property.
Section 11. Alabama Natural Heritage Program.
(a) The Alabama Natural Heritage Program is hereby established as a part of the Lands Division
of the Department, or its duly designated successor, and shall be funded from the Forever Wild
Land Trust or the Forever Wild Land Trust Stewardship Account as provided by the Board, and
from private donations.
(b) For purposes of this program, the Department, subject to approval by the Board, shall:
(1) Produce an inventory of Alabama's natural heritage resources, including their location and
ecological status.
(2) Maintain a natural heritage data bank of inventory data and other relevant information for
ecologically significant sites supporting natural heritage resources. Information from this data
bank may be made available to public agencies and to private institutions or individuals for
environmental assessment and land management purposes.
(3) Develop a Natural Heritage Plan which suggests priorities for the protection, acquisition and
management of dedicated natural area preserves.
(4) Establish procedures relating to the confidentiality of data and inquiries for information in
order to protect natural resources and encourage use by public agencies and private organizations
and individuals in planning or conducting their activities.
Section 12. Dedication of Natural Area Preserves.
(a) The Department shall, in the name of the State and upon the recommendation of the Board,
accept the dedication of natural areas on lands deemed by the Board and the Commissioner to
qualify as natural area preserves under the provisions of this Amendment. Natural area preserves
may be offered for dedication by voluntary act of the owner. The owner of a qualified natural
area may transfer fee simple title or other interest in land to the State. Natural area preserves may
be acquired by gift, grant or purchase.
(b) Dedication of a natural area preserve shall become effective only upon acceptance of the
instrument of dedication by the Board and the Commissioner.
(c) The instrument of dedication may:
(1) Contain restrictions and other provisions relating to management, use, development, transfer,
and public access, and may contain any other restrictions and provisions as may be necessary or
advisable to further the purposes of this Amendment;
(2) Define, consistent with the purposes of this Amendment, the respective rights and duties of
the owner and of the state and provide procedures to be followed in case of violations of the
restrictions;
(3) Recognize and create reversionary rights, transfers upon condition or with limitations, and
gifts over; and
(4) Vary in provisions from one natural area preserve to another in accordance with differences in
the characteristics and conditions of the several areas.
(d) Public departments, commissions, boards, counties, municipalities, corporations, colleges,
universities and all other agencies and instrumentalities of the state and its political subdivisions
may dedicate suitable areas within their jurisdiction as natural area preserves in accordance with
the powers and authorities granted to such organizations by existing state legislation.
(e) The Board may enter into amendments to the instrument of dedication upon finding that such
amendments will not permit an impairment, disturbance, use, or development of the area
inconsistent with the provisions of this Amendment. If the fee simple estate in the natural area
preserve is not held by the state under this article, no amendment may be made without the
written consent of the owner of the other interests therein.
Section 13. Sunset Provision.
Beginning with the state's 2012-2013 fiscal year and each succeeding fiscal year, all moneys to
be paid into the Forever Wild Land Trust shall be paid to the Alabama Trust Fund in the event
the Legislature has not provided for the continuation of payments into the Forever Wild Land
Trust Fund as provided for in this section, provided that 2.5% of the trust income earned from the
investment of funds in the Alabama Trust Fund shall continue to be paid to the Forever Wild
Stewardship Account established in Section 9 of this Amendment until such time as the
Legislature, by legislative act, determines that interest income earned from the investment of
funds within the corpus of the Stewardship Account is sufficient for the proper administration
and stewardship of properties acquired from the Forever Wild Land Trust. And provided further,
that the Legislature, by legislative act, or by the enactment of a constitutional amendment may
continue payment of the revenues provided in Section 7 hereof, or at any time provide for the
payment of other revenues, into the Forever Wild Land Trust. At such time as the payment of
trust income into the Forever Wild Land Trust shall cease, the percentage of trust income
accruing to said trust fund shall be paid into the Alabama Trust Fund each year to become a part
of the corpus of the Alabama Trust Fund.
Section 14. Amendment Self-Executing.
This Amendment shall be self-executing, but the Legislature shall have the right and power to
enact laws supplemental hereto and in furtherance of the purposes and objectives hereof,
provided that such laws are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Amendment.
Section 15. Severability.
If any provision of this Amendment, or the application of any provision to any entity, person, or
circumstance is for any reason adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the
remainder of this Amendment and its application shall not be affected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 544 544.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 544 RATIFIED 1993

Election of Board of Education for City of Pell City.
This legislature may by local act provide for the election of the members of the board of
education of the City of Pell City in St. Clair County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 545 545.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 545 RATIFIED 1993

Industrial Development Board of Lawrence County.
The Legislature may provide by local law, from time to time, for the consolidation of the power
and authority granted to Lawrence County pursuant to Amendment No. 190 of the Constitution
of 1901, or to any public authority or corporation created by Lawrence County pursuant to
Amendment No. 190 into the Industrial Development Board of Lawrence County George C.
Wallace Airpark Authority, which shall have all of the power and authority and assume all of the
obligations of Lawrence County pursuant to Amendment No. 190, or any public authority or
corporation created by Lawrence County pursuant to Amendment No. 190. The Legislature may
in addition provide by local law for the organization and membership of the board of directors of
the public authority or corporation. Any taxes currently levied pursuant to Amendment No. 190
shall remain in full force and effect. Any action currently required to be approved by a vote of
electors shall be approved by a vote of the electors of the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 546 546.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 546 RATIFIED 1993

Sales and Use Tax in Limestone County.
Section 1. There is hereby levied, in addition to all other taxes of every kind now imposed by
law, and shall be collected as herein provided, a privilege or license tax against the person on
account of the business activities and in the amount to be determined by the application of rates
against gross sales, or gross receipts, as the case may be, as follows:
(a) Upon every person, firm, or corporation, (including the State of Alabama, the University of
Alabama, Auburn University and all other institutions of higher learning in the state, whether
such institutions be denominational, state, county or municipal institution, and any association or
other agency or instrumentality of such institutions) engaged, or continuing within Limestone
County in the business of selling at retail any tangible personal property whatsoever, including
merchandise and commodities of every kind and character, (not including, however, bonds or
other evidences of debts or stocks, nor sale or sales of material and supplies to any person for use
in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repair or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships and other
watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as registered
with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources), an amount equal to one percent (1%) of the gross proceeds of sales of the
business except where a different amount is expressly provided herein. Provided, however, that
any person engaging or continuing in business as a retailer and wholesaler or jobber shall pay the
tax required on the gross proceeds of retail sales of such business at the rates specified, when his
books are kept so as to show separately the gross proceeds of sales of each business, and when
his books are not so kept he shall pay the tax as retailer on the gross sales of the business.
(b) Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged, or continuing within Limestone County, the
business of conducting, or operating, places of amusement or entertainment, billiard and pool
rooms, bowling alleys, amusement devices, musical devices, theaters, opera houses, moving
picture shows, vaudevilles, amusement parks, athletic contests, including wrestling matches,
prize fights, boxing and wrestling exhibitions, football and baseball games, (including athletic
contests conducted by or under the auspices of any educational institution within Limestone
County, or any athletic association thereof or other association whether such institution or
association be a denominational, a state, or county, or a municipal institution or association or a
state, county, or city school, or other institution, association or school), skating rinks, race tracks,
golf courses, or any other place at which any exhibition, display, amusement or entertainment is
offered to the public or place or places where an admission fee is charged, including public
bathing places, public dance halls of every kind and description with Limestone County, an
amount equal to one percent (1%) of the gross receipts of any such business. Provided, however,
not withstanding any language to the contrary in the prior portion of this subsection, the tax
provisions so specified shall not apply to any athletic event conducted by a public primary or
secondary school. The tax amount which would have been collected pursuant to this subsection
shall continue to be collected by said public primary or secondary school but shall be retained by
the school which collected it and shall be used by said school for school purposes.
(c) Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within Limestone County in
the business of selling at retail machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing
and manufacturing of tangible personal property, an amount equal to one-half percent ( 1/2 %) of
the gross proceeds of the sale of such machines; provided, that the term "machines," as herein
used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, or
manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such machines, attachments and
replacements therefore which are made or manufactured for use on or in the operation of such
machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines and are customarily so used.
(d) Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within Limestone County in
the business of selling at retail any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer
or mobile home set-up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks,
anchoring, cable pipes and any other materials pertaining thereto an amount equal to one-half
percent ( 1/2 %) of the gross proceeds of sale of said automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-
trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies, provided, however, where a
person subject to the tax provided for in this subsection withdraws from his stock in trade any
automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer for use by him or by his employee
or agent in the operation of such business, there shall be paid, in lieu of the tax levied herein, a
fee of &dollar;0.00 per year or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle, truck trailer,
semi-trailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of such person. Each such year or part
thereof shall begin with the day or anniversary date, as the case may be, of such withdrawal and
shall run for the twelve succeeding months or part thereof during which such automotive vehicle,
truck trailer, or house trailer shall remain the property of such person.
Where any used automobile vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade
or in a series of trades, as a credit or part payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax
levied herein shall be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold
less the credit for the used vehicle taken in trade.
(e) Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within Limestone County in
the business of selling at retail any machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting,
cultivating and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of
agricultural produce or products, livestock or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines,
machinery or equipment, attachments and replacements therefore which are made or
manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, and
which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery or
equipment, an amount equal to one-half percent ( 1/2 %) of the gross proceeds of the sale thereof.
Provided, however, the one-half percent ( 1/2 %) rate herein prescribed with respect to parts,
attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or trailer designed
primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the production and
harvesting of agricultural commodities.
Where any used machine, machinery or equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and
harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of agricultural produce or
products, livestock and poultry on farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part
payment on a sale of a new or used machine, machinery or equipment, the tax levied herein shall
be paid on the net difference, that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery or
equipment sold, less the credit for the used machine, machinery or equipment taken in trade.
(f) Upon every person, firm or corporation engaged or continuing within Limestone County in
the business of selling through coin-operated dispensing machines, food and food products for
human consumption, not including beverages other than coffee, milk, milk products and
substitutes therefore, there is hereby levied a tax equal to one percent (1%) of the cost of such
food, food products and beverages sold through such machines, which cost for the purpose of this
subsection shall be the gross proceeds of sales of such business.
Section 2. (a) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
Limestone County of tangible personal property (not including materials and supplies bought for
use in fulfilling a contract for the painting, repairing, or reconditioning of vessels, barges, ships
and other watercraft and commercial fishing vessels of over five (5) tons load displacement as
registered with the U.S. Coast Guard and licensed by the State of Alabama Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources) purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this
amendment for storage, use or other consumption in Limestone County, except as provided in
subsections (b), (c), and (d), at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price of such property.
(b) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in Limestone
County of any machines used in mining, quarrying, compounding, processing, and manufacturing
of tangible personal property purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this amendment
at the rate of one half percent ( 1/2 %) of the sales price of any such machine; provided, that the
term "machine" as herein used, shall include machinery which is used for mining, quarrying,
compounding, processing, or manufacturing tangible personal property, and the parts of such
machines, attachments and replacements therefore, which are made or manufactured for used on
or in the operation of such machines and which are necessary to the operation of such machines
and are customarily so used.
(c) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in Limestone
County of any automotive vehicle or truck trailer, semi-trailer, house trailer or mobile home set-
up materials and supplies including but not limited to steps, blocks, anchoring, cable pipes and
any other materials pertaining thereto purchased at retail on or after the effective date of this
amendment for storage, use or other consumption in Limestone County at the rate of one half
percent ( 1/2 %) of the sales price of such automotive vehicle, truck trailer, semi-trailer, house
trailer or mobile home set-up materials and supplies. Where any used automotive vehicle, truck
trailer, semi-trailer or house trailer is taken in trade, or in a series of trades, as a credit or part
payment on the sale of a new or used vehicle, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net
difference, that is, the price of the new or used vehicle sold less the credit for the used vehicle
taken in trade.
(d) An excise tax is hereby levied and imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
Limestone County of any machine, machinery, or equipment which is used in planting,
cultivating, and harvesting farm products, or used in connection with the production of
agricultural produce or products, livestock, or poultry on farms, and the parts of such machines,
machinery, or equipment, attachments and replacements therefore which are made or
manufactured for use on or in the operation of such machine, machinery, or equipment, and
which are necessary to and customarily used in the operation of such machine, machinery, or
equipment, which is purchased at retail after the effective date of this amendment, for the
storage, use or other consumption in Limestone County at the rate of one half percent ( 1/2 %) of
the sales price of such property; regardless of whether the retailer is or is not engaged in the
business in this County. Provided, however, the one half percent ( 1/2 %) rate herein prescribed
with respect to parts, attachments, and replacements shall not apply to any automotive vehicle or
trailer designed primarily for public highway use, except farm trailers used primarily in the
production and harvesting of agricultural commodities. Where any used machine, machinery or
equipment which is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting farm products or used in
connection with the production of agricultural produce or products, livestock, and poultry on
farms is taken in trade or in a series of trades as a credit or part payment on a sale of a new or
used machine, machinery, or equipment, the tax levied herein shall be paid on the net difference,
that is, the price of the new or used machine, machinery, or equipment sold, less the credit for the
used machine, machinery, or equipment taken in trade.
Section 3. The tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue at the same time and in
the same manner as state sales and use taxes are collected. On or prior to the date the tax is due,
each person subject to the tax shall file with the department a report in the form prescribed by the
department. The report shall set forth, with respect to all sales and business transactions that are
required to be used as a measure of the tax levied, a correct statement of the gross proceeds of all
the sales and gross receipts of all business transactions. The report shall also include items of
information pertinent to the tax as the department may require. Any person subject to the tax
levied by this act may defer reporting credit sales until after their collection, and in the event the
person defers reporting them, the person shall thereafter include in each monthly report all credit
collections made during the preceding month, and shall pay the tax due at the time of filing the
report. All reports filed with the department under this section shall be available for inspection by
the county commission, or its designee.
Section 4. Each person engaging or continuing in a business subject to the tax levied by this
amendment, shall add to the sales price or admission fee and collect from the purchaser or the
person paying the admission fee the amount due by the taxpayer because of the sale or admission.
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the tax to fail or refuse to add to the sales price or
admission fee and to collect from the purchaser or person paying the admission fee the amount
required to be added to the sale or admission price. It shall be unlawful for any person subject to
the tax levied to refund or offer to refund all or any part of the amount collected or to absorb or
advertise directly or indirectly the absorption or refund of any portion of the tax.
Section 5. The tax shall constitute a debt due Limestone County. The tax, together with any
interest and penalties, shall constitute and be secured by a lien upon the property of any person
from whom the tax is due or who is required to collect the tax. The department shall collect the
tax, enforce this amendment, and have and exercise all rights and remedies that the state or the
department has for collection of the state sales and use tax. The department may employ special
counsel as is necessary to enforce collection of the tax levied by this amendment and to enforce
this amendment. The department shall pay the special counsel any fees it deems necessary and
proper from the proceeds of the tax collected by it for Limestone County.
Section 6. All provisions of the state sales and use tax statutes with respect to the payment,
assessment, and collection of the state sales and use tax, making of reports, keeping and
preserving records, penalties for failure to pay the tax, promulgating rules and regulations with
respect to the state sales and use tax, and the administration and enforcement of the state sales
and use tax statutes which are not inconsistent with this amendment shall apply to the tax levied
herein. The state Commissioner of Revenue and the department shall have and exercise the same
powers, duties, and obligations with respect to the tax levied under this amendment that are
imposed on the commissioner and department by the state sales and use tax statutes. All
provisions of the state sales and use tax statutes that are made applicable by this amendment to
the tax levied under this amendment, and to the administration and enforcement of this
amendment, are incorporated by reference and made a part of this act as if fully set forth herein.
Section 7. The department shall charge Limestone County for collecting the tax levied under this
act in an amount or percentage of total collections as may be agreed upon by the commissioner
and the Limestone County Commission. The charge shall not exceed five percent of the total
amount of the tax collected in the county. The charge may be deducted each month from the
gross revenues from the tax before certification of the amount of the proceeds due Limestone
County for that month. The Commissioner of Revenue shall pay into the State Treasury all
amounts collected under this act, as the tax is received by the department on or before the first
day of each successive month. The commissioner shall certify to the State Comptroller the
amount collected and paid into the State Treasury for the benefit of Limestone County during the
month immediately preceding the certification. The State Comptroller shall issue a warrant each
month payable to the County Treasurer of Limestone County in an amount equal to the certified
amount which shall be paid into the county general fund to be divided between the Athens City
Board of Education and the Limestone County Board of Education based on the average daily
attendance of the two school systems.
Section 8. Effective date of this tax should be the first day of the second month following
approval by the qualified electors of Limestone County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 547 547.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 547 RATIFIED 1993

Compensation of Probate Judge of Pickens County.
Effective the beginning of the next term of office after ratification of this amendment, the Judge
of Probate of Pickens County shall be compensated on a salary basis. The judge shall receive in
equal monthly installments from the General Fund of Pickens County such salary as provided by
general law, unless provided otherwise by local law. The salary shall be the entire compensation
received by the judge for services in any official or ex officio capacity. The salary shall be in lieu
of all fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges previously paid to the Judge
of Probate of Pickens County.
All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the Judge of Probate of Pickens County shall continue to be collected but shall be paid into
the General Fund of Pickens County.
The County Commission of Pickens County shall provide the Judge of Probate with such office
personnel, equipment, and supplies as the County Commission may consider necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of the office. Compensation of any personnel so provided shall be
fixed by the County Commission and shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of the
General Fund of Pickens County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 548 548.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 548 RATIFIED 1993

Election of Talladega City Board of Education.
The Legislature may by local act provide for the election of the members of the Talladega City
Board of Education.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 549 549.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 549 RATIFIED 1993

Bingo Games in Walker County.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal outside of the corporate limits of
the City of Jasper in Walker County, subject to any resolution by the county governing body as
provided by law regulating the operation of bingo. The governing body may promulgate rules and
regulations for issuing permits or licenses, and for operating bingo games, within its respective
jurisdiction. The county governing body shall insure compliance pursuant to any ordinance and
the following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo.
(2) No bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit organization, unless the
organization shall have been in existence for at least 60 months and owned real property at least
five years immediately prior to issuing the permit or license.
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate or rental shall not be
based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from operating the bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association,
or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of
the nonprofit organization. No nonprofit organization may pay consulting fees to any individual
or entity for any services performed relating to operating or conducting any bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name or allow any other person or entity to use its
identity in operating or advertising a bingo game in which the nonprofit organization is not
directly and solely operating the bingo game.
(6) Prizes given by any qualified nonprofit organization for playing bingo games shall not exceed
the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value, set by the Legislature, during any bingo session. The
Legislature shall set a maximum amount for any calendar week.
(7) No person or organization, by whatever name or composition, shall take any expenses for
operating a bingo game except as permitted by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 550 550.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 550 RATIFIED 1993

Bingo Games in City of Jasper.
The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations for
charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in the corporate limits of the City
of Jasper in Walker County, subject to any resolution or ordinance by the city governing body as
provided by law regulating the operation of bingo. The governing body may promulgate rules and
regulations for issuing permits or licenses, and for operating bingo games, within its respective
jurisdiction. The governing body of the City of Jasper shall insure compliance pursuant to any
ordinance and the following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo.
(2) No bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit organization, unless the
organization shall have been in existence for at least 60 months and owned real property at least
five years immediately prior to issuing the permit or license.
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate or rental shall not be
based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from operating the bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association,
or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of
the nonprofit organization. No nonprofit organization may pay consulting fees to any individual
or entity for any services performed relating to operating or conducting any bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name or allow any other person or entity to use its
identity in operating or advertising a bingo game in which the nonprofit organization is not
directly and solely operating the bingo game.
(6) Prizes given by any qualified nonprofit organization for playing bingo games shall not exceed
the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value, set by the Legislature, during any bingo session. The
Legislature shall set a maximum amount for any calendar week.
(7) No person or organization, by whatever name or composition, shall take any expenses for
operating a bingo game except as permitted by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 551 551.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1993 ***

AMENDMENT 551 RATIFIED 1993

Special Ad Valorem Taxes for Fire Protection and Emergency Services in Montgomery County.
The Legislature declares that all volunteer fire departments, including volunteer fire departments
that have emergency medical technicians that are members, are organizations that are public in
nature and serve to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Montgomery County.
In addition to all ad valorem taxes levied for fire protection, the Montgomery County
Commission may levy and collect a special ad valorem tax, not to exceed two and one-half mills
in any year on each dollar of assessed value of the property taxed, on property in the
unincorporated area of Montgomery County for the purpose of providing fire protection in the
unincorporated area of Montgomery County.
The tax provided in this act shall be levied, collected, administered, and enforced at the same
time, in the same manner, and under the same requirements and laws as state ad valorem taxes.
The officials collecting or assessing the tax shall be entitled to the same fees and compensation
as are provided for collecting and assessing ad valorem taxes. The proceeds of the tax shall be
paid into the county general fund. Within thirty days after payment into the county general fund,
the Montgomery County Commission shall pay the funds to the Montgomery County Association
of Volunteer Firefighters, hereafter referred to as the county association. The county association
shall distribute the funds as follows:
(1) 60 percent shall be divided equally among all eligible volunteer fire departments.
(2) 30 percent shall be divided according to a percentage based upon the monies collected in a
fire district compared to the total monies collected. The county association shall notify the
Revenue Commissioner within 30 days after this act becomes operative of the designated fire
districts. The boundaries of the fire districts may be rearranged at the discretion of the county
association as they deem necessary, from time to time, to maximize fire protection services in the
county.
(3) Ten percent of the money shall be designated as discretionary fund of the county association
to be used for any expenditure otherwise allowable under this act.
In order to be an eligible volunteer fire department for purposes of this act, a volunteer fire
department shall be in good standing with the Montgomery County Association of Volunteer
Firefighters.
Funds disbursed to eligible volunteer fire departments pursuant to this act shall be expended only
for fire protection and emergency medical services, including but not limited to, training,
supplies, buildings, capital improvements, equipment, insurance, professional services, and dues.
The funds shall not be expended for food, drink, social activities, or fund-raising activities. After
receiving the funds, the volunteer fire departments shall keep accurate records to verify that the
funds are properly expended. By September 15th of each year, the department shall file a report
with the county association detailing the expenditure of all funds during the previous twelve
months and setting out a schedule of all proposed projects. The filing shall account for all
unspent funds and whether unspent funds have been obligated. Unspent funds that have not been
obligated which exceed the amount of total receipts paid to the department for the prior year from
this tax shall be returned to the county association for redistribution equally among the other fire
departments. The county association shall supply the accounting forms to each eligible volunteer
fire department. The copy of the year-end report shall be filed with the county commission and
shall be audited by the Examiners of Public Accounts of the state on the same basis as county
funds are audited.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of an eligible volunteer fire department, all remaining funds
derived from this act or assets purchased with the funds derived from this act shall be transferred
to the county association.
Prior to the levy of the fire protection tax in the unincorporated areas of county, there shall be
submitted to the electors at a special election called for that purpose in the county, the question of
whether the tax shall be levied. If a majority of the qualified electors within the unincorporated
area of the county who vote at the election approve the tax, the tax shall be effective and levied.
If a majority of the qualified electors within the unincorporated area of the county who vote at the
election do not approve the tax, the tax shall not be effective and shall not be levied.
Elections on the question of the levy of a fire protection tax in the county may be held at any time
and from time to time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if at an election held after the ratification
of this amendment the proposal to levy the tax so submitted is defeated, then the proposal may
not be submitted at another election held in the county within two years from the last election
held under this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 552 552.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1994 ***

AMENDMENT 552 RATIFIED 1994

Election of Dothan City Board of Education.
The Legislature may, by local act, provide for the election of the Dothan City Board of
Education.
This amendment shall not become operative unless it is approved by a majority of the qualified
electors of the City of Dothan who vote thereon upon its submission.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 553 553.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1994 ***

AMENDMENT 553 RATIFIED 1994

Election of Decatur City Board of Education.
The Legislature may, by local act, provide for the election of the Decatur City Board of
Education.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 554 554.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1994 ***

AMENDMENT 554 RATIFIED 1994

Levy and Collection of Special Ad Valorem Property Tax for Public Library Purposes in
Chambers County.
The governing body of Chambers County shall, subject to succeeding provisions of this
amendment (including those relating to approval by the Chambers County electorate), and
notwithstanding anything in the Constitution or laws of Alabama to the contrary, levy and collect
a special county ad valorem or property tax at the rate of twenty cents ($.20) on each one hundred
dollars ($100) of taxable property in said County, for a period of ten fiscal (or ad valorem tax)
years of said County. Such tax shall be in addition to any taxes now authorized, or that may
hereafter be authorized, by the Constitution and laws of Alabama to be levied and collected in
Chambers County or by said governing body.
The proceeds of the aforesaid tax shall be used exclusively for public library purposes in
Chambers County, including particularly (but without limitation)
(a) the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, equipment,
operation, maintenance and support (or any one or more thereof) of
(1) any public library or libraries operated or supported (whether in whole or in part) by said
County, by the Chambers County Library Board, or by any other similar public or governmental
body empowered, under the Constitution and laws of Alabama, to operate or support public
libraries, including particularly, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, (i) that
certain public library located in the City of Lafayette now owned by the City of Lafayette, and (ii)
that certain public library located in the City of Valley now owned by a not-for-profit foundation
or a not-for-profit corporation, and
(2) any other public libraries, branch libraries or related public library facilities (including,
without limitation, one or more buildings and any equipment and lands necessary therefor)
located or to be located in Chambers County and forming or to form a part of the public library
system of said County; and
(b) the payment of principal of or interest (or premium, if any) on any bonds, warrants, notes or
other securities (including, without limitation, refunding securities) issued by said County for
public library purposes in Chambers County; provided, that any public library, branch library or
related public library facilities described in the preceding provisions of this amendment shall be
owned either by said County, said Chambers County Library Board or other public or
governmental body, or by a not-for-profit corporation or other similar nonprofit organization
(regardless of how denominated or organized); and provided further, (A) that the proceeds of
such tax may be expended to pay any costs of constructing, reconstructing, improving or
enlarging any additions or improvements to any building or buildings used or to be used (at least
in part) by, or in connection with the operation of, the aforesaid public library located in the City
of Valley, notwithstanding that such building or buildings may also then be used (or may
thereafter be used) in part by, or in connection with the operation of, archives or other facilities
that are not, and are not expected to be, operated for public library purposes, and (B) that none of
the proceeds of such tax may be expended to pay any costs of operating, equipping, maintaining
or supporting any such facilities that are not, and are not expected to be, operated for public
library purposes. In expending (or causing to be expended) the proceeds of such tax for the
purposes herein authorized, and in otherwise carrying out the purposes of this amendment, the
governing body of Chambers County shall not be subject to the provisions of Sections 93 and 94
of the Constitution, as amended.
If this amendment is approved, and if a majority of the qualified electors of Chambers County
who vote at the election thereon vote in favor of this amendment, then the tax hereinabove
authorized shall be levied and collected as hereinabove provided, without any other election
having been held thereon. However, if this amendment is approved but a majority of the qualified
electors of Chambers County who vote at the election thereon vote against it, then such tax shall
not be levied unless the question of the levy of such tax as hereinabove provided shall have been
submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of said County and approved by a majority of those
voting at such election; and such tax shall, upon such approval, be levied and collected as
hereinabove provided. Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one year,
and shall be called, held and conducted in the same way, according to the general laws of
Alabama (with such modifications as shall be necessary to comply with the provisions of this
amendment), as elections on the question of issuing county bonds. Following the approval of the
Chambers County electorate (whether at the election on this amendment or at a subsequent
county election as hereinabove provided), the tax herein authorized shall, to the fullest extent
consistent with the efficient and practical administration of the tax system of Chambers County
and without regard to any law otherwise requiring the levy of county taxes during a certain month
or on or before a particular date, be initially levied by the governing body of said County so that
it shall first become due and payable on the October 1 next succeeding such election.
The provisions of this amendment are and shall be self-executing, and authorization from or any
other action by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the levy and collection of the tax
herein authorized, to the use of the proceeds of such tax as herein provided, or to the call, holding
or conduct of any election in said County as hereinabove provided for. It is hereby specifically
declared that this amendment is not being proposed pursuant to the provisions of that certain
amendment to the Constitution (known as Amendment No. 425) that was proposed by Act No.
82-330 adopted at the 1982 Regular Session of the Legislature of Alabama, and the provisions of
the said Amendment No. 425 are hereby declared to be inapplicable to this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 555 425.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 555 RATIFIED 1995

Amendment of Amendment No. 425.
(a) Any proposed constitutional amendment which affects or applies to only one county shall be
adopted as a valid part of the constitution by a favorable vote of a majority of the qualified
electors of the affected county who vote on the amendment. Any proposed constitutional
amendment which affects or applies to only one political subdivision within a county or counties
shall be adopted as a valid part of the constitution by a favorable vote of a majority of the
qualified electors of both the county and the political subdivision affected by the amendment who
vote on the amendment. The proposed amendment may provide for a separate referendum in a
political subdivision of less than a county if a simultaneous referendum is not possible because of
conflicting voting precincts.
(b) The proposed amendment shall first be approved by at least a three-fifths vote of the elected
members of each house of the Legislature with no dissenting vote cast and approved by a
majority vote of the Local Constitutional Amendment Commission. The commission shall be
composed of the Governor, Presiding Officer of the Senate, Attorney General, Secretary of State,
and Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Legislature may by general act specify
procedures for the Local Constitution Amendment Commission, but may not expand its role
beyond deciding whether the amendment affects more than one county or more than one political
subdivision in one or more counties.
(c) Notice of the election, together with the proposed amendment, shall be given by proclamation
of the Governor, which proclamation shall be published once a week for four successive weeks
next preceding the day appointed for the election in each newspaper qualified to run legal notices
in the county or counties affected.
(d) In the event any constitutional amendment proposed for adoption pursuant to this amendment
is approved by at least a three-fifths vote of the elected members of each house of the Legislature
but with one or more dissenting votes cast, the amendment shall be treated as a statewide
amendment as described in subsection (e).
(e) If after having been approved by at least a three-fifths vote of the elected members of each
house of the Legislature without a dissenting vote cast the proposed amendment is not approved
by a majority vote the Local Constitutional Amendment Commission, it shall automatically be
submitted in a statewide referendum in accordance with the procedures for proposed statewide
constitutional amendments under Sections 284 and 285 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
If the proposed amendment is submitted in a statewide referendum, it shall not become effective
unless approved at a referendum by a majority of the qualified voters of the affected county
voting on the proposition and the affected political subdivision voting on the proposition, if it
affects less than the whole county. The referendum in a political subdivision may be held at the
same time as the election for the ratification of the proposed amendment, or at another time if
provided by the proposed amendment.
(f) Notwithstanding any provision of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, to the contrary, all
constitutional amendments which have been adopted by a majority vote of the appropriate
electorate pursuant to Amendment No. 425 to the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, are hereby
ratified and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 556 556.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 556 RATIFIED 1995

Conveyance to Huntsville-Madison County Marina and Port Authority Title to Alabama State
Docks's Property.
The State of Alabama, through the Alabama State Docks Department, may convey, without
consideration, title to its real property, equipment, and facilities located in Madison County,
Alabama, and known as the Alabama State Docks, to the Huntsville-Madison County Marina and
Port Authority, a public corporation. The conveyance shall be subject to existing leases and other
contractual agreements now in effect. Any laws or parts of laws, or any provisions of the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, are revised, superseded, and repealed to the extent they are in
conflict with this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 557 557.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 557 RATIFIED 1995

Basic Rights for Crime Victims.
(a) Crime victims, as defined by law or their lawful representatives, including the next of kin of
homicide victims, are entitled to the right to be informed, to be present, and to be heard when
authorized, at all crucial stages of criminal proceedings, to the extent that these rights do not
interfere with the constitutional rights of the person accused of committing the crime.
(b) Nothing in this amendment or in any enabling statute adopted pursuant to this amendment
shall be construed as creating a cause of action against the state or any of its agencies, officials,
employees, or political subdivisions. The Legislature may from time to time enact enabling
legislation to carry out and implement this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 558 094.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 558 RATIFIED 1995

Amendment of Section 94.
SECTION 94
Political subdivisions not to grant public money or lend credit to individuals or corporations;
alienation of recreational facilities and housing projects by political subdivisions and public
bodies; expenditures by local school boards of education for recognition of contributions to
public education.
(a) The Legislature shall not have power to authorize any county, city, town, or other subdivision
of this state to lend its credit, or to grant public money or thing of value in aid of, or to any
individual, association, or corporation whatsoever, or to become a stockholder in any
corporation, association, or company, by issuing bonds or otherwise. The Legislature may enact
general, special, or local laws authorizing political subdivisions and public bodies to alienate,
with or without a valuable consideration, public parks and playgrounds, or other public
recreational facilities and public housing projects, conditional upon the approval of a majority of
the duly qualified electors of the county, city, town, or other subdivision affected thereby, voting
at an election held for that purposes.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), local school boards of education may
expend public funds for the recognition of significant contributions to education in Alabama and
to promote educational excellence by students, faculty, staff, and the public. Recognitions shall
be in the form of trophies, plaques, academic banquets, and other honors that promote academic
excellence in the public schools of Alabama and recognize special deeds that strengthen public
education in Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 559 559.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 559 RATIFIED 1995

Ratification and Validation of Ad Valorem Tax Levies and Payments in Baldwin County.
(a) All ad valorem tax levies and payments collected in Baldwin County prior to the approval of
this amendment, are hereby ratified, validated, and confirmed.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Baldwin County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 560 560.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***
 
AMENDMENT 560 RATIFIED 1995

Additional Fees Assessed on Cases in Barbour County.
(a) In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized, and notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Constitution, including without limitation Sections 96, 104, and 105 of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, there shall be an additional twenty-five dollar ($25) fee
assessed and taxed as costs on each civil case and an additional fifty dollar ($50) fee assessed on
each criminal case, including traffic cases, filed in the Circuit Court, District Court, or any
Municipal Court in Barbour County, as well as a fee not to exceed five dollars ($5) for the
service of all pleadings and other documents in connection with any such action or case. The
aforementioned fees shall not be waived by any court unless all other fees, assessments, costs,
fines, and charges associated with the cases are waived. The additional fees, when collected by
the clerks or other collection officers of the courts, shall be paid into the General Fund of
Barbour County to be used by the county commission for the planning, designing, construction,
financing, and operation of a new county jail. This amendment shall be self-executing and shall
require no enabling legislation.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Barbour County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this amendment, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 561 561.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 561 RATIFIED 1995

Fire Protection and Emergency Medical Services Districts in Blount County.
(a) The Legislature may, by local law from time to time, provide for the establishment of districts
in Blount County for fire protection and emergency medical services and provide for mandatory
annual dues in the districts upon approval of the qualified electors residing within the districts.
The Legislature shall provide for the operation of the districts and for the collection of mandatory
annual dues. The Legislature may limit the liability of the county for the operation of a district
and provide that a district shall be exempt from all taxation. The districts may include the area
currently served by the Remlap Volunteer Fire and Rescue, Inc., or may be formed in other areas
of the county.
(b) Act No. 93-342, H. 970, 1993 Regular Session, is repealed.
(c) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Blount County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 562 562.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 562 RATIFIED 1995

Local Legislation to Change Procedure for Sale of Lands for Delinquent Taxes in Calhoun
County.
(a) Notwithstanding Sections 104 and 105 to the contrary, the Legislature of the state of Alabama
may enact local legislation applicable to Calhoun County to change the method prescribed by law
for giving notice to delinquent Calhoun County taxpayers of their failure to pay taxes assessed
against any property which is assessed to them and to change the notice required to be given
them prior to the sale for taxes of the property and to change the method for issuing decrees for
the sale of land and the trials held to determine whether the sales should be ordered and to
change the method of giving notice to delinquent property owners to show cause why a decree of
sale should not be rendered against them and to change the method regarding the sale of the
property and the report of the amount of taxes collected from the sale.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Calhoun County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 563 563.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 563 RATIFIED 1995

Promotion of Industry, Trade, and Economic Development in Calhoun County.
(a) The Legislature may, by general, local, or special law, provide for the creation, incorporation,
organization, operation, administration, authority, and financing of a public corporation
empowered or intended to assist or aid in any way Calhoun County or any municipality there in
promoting industry, trade, and economic development of Calhoun County and each municipality
situated in the county, and the Legislature may grant the corporation all powers, rights,
privileges, exemptions, and authority as the Legislature considers necessary or desirable for the
furtherance and accomplishment of the purposes of the public corporation. The passage and
enactment of Act No. 82-222 of the 1982 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature, and all
terms and provisions of Act No. 82-222, are approved, ratified, and confirmed in all respects, any
provision of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, to the contrary notwithstanding,
and Act No. 82-222 shall be effective from and as of the date of its passage and approval by the
Governor during the 1982 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature. Any act enacted during
the 1993 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature, or during any subsequent regular or special
session of the Alabama Legislature, in amendment of or supplementary to Act No. 82-222 shall
be effective as of the date of its passage by the Legislature and approval by the Governor, or upon
its otherwise becoming a law. The creation, incorporation, organization, operation,
administration, authority, and financing of the Calhoun County Economic Development Council
is approved, ratified, and confirmed from and as of the date of passage and approval by the
Governor of Act No. 82-222 during the 1982 Regular Session of the Alabama Legislature. All
actions taken, and all obligations, whether secured or unsecured and whether general or limited
as to the source of payment, incurred or assumed, in the name and on behalf of the Calhoun
County Economic Development Council by any directors, officers, employees, representatives, or
agents thereof in furtherance of the powers and purposes of the council as set forth in Act No. 82-
222, as the same may be at any time amended or supplemented, prior to the date this amendment
is proclaimed ratified, are approved, ratified, and confirmed as fully effective for all purposes
from and as of the respective dates of which the actions were taken and the obligations were
incurred or assumed.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Calhoun County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this act, as provided for in Section 2 of this
act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 564 564.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 564 RATIFIED 1995

Fire Protection and Special Fire Protection Property Tax in Covington County.
(a) The Legislature hereby declares that the fire departments and rescue squads that receive funds
pursuant to this amendment are organizations which are public in nature, as they promote and
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
(b) The County Commission of Covington County shall levy and collect a special property tax, in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, of three mills on each one dollar's
worth of taxable property as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation during the preceding year.
The proceeds of the additional taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire,
emergency medical, and rescue services.
(c) The Revenue Commissioner of Covington County shall assess the tax herein provided for,
and shall collect the fire tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are
collected. The proceeds of the tax shall be paid into a special county fund. Within thirty days of
payment into the special fund, the county commission shall allocate the funds among the eligible
fire departments and rescue squads. The funds shall be divided equally among the eligible fire
departments and rescue squads.
(d) An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in
Covington County that maintains an ISO-approved rating of at least Class 9, is certified under the
Alabama Forestry Commission guidelines, and is a member in good standing of the Covington
County Firefighters Association. An eligible rescue squad, for purposes of this amendment,
means a rescue squad that is certified by the Alabama Association of Rescue Squads or
Emergency Medical Services.
(e) Funds paid to eligible fire departments and rescue squads shall only be expended for fire
protection and emergency medical and rescue services including training, supplies, and
equipment. The funds may also be expended to purchase liability insurance to insure coverage of
acts or omissions which are directly related to the functions of a fire department or rescue squad
which are committed by a fire department or rescue squad or the personnel of a fire department
or rescue squad. The funds may not be expended for food, drink, social activities or fund-raising
activities. After receiving funds, the fire departments and rescue squads shall keep accurate
records to verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15 of each year, the fire
departments and rescue squads shall file a financial statement with the Covington County
Commission detailing the expenditure of all funds received from this amendment during the
previous twelve months. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the
unspent funds have been obligated. The Covington County Firefighters Association shall supply
the accounting forms to each eligible fire department and rescue squad. No new fire departments
shall be funded within Covington County without prior approval of the Covington County
Firefighters Association and the Covington County Commission and without first being certified
according to Alabama Forestry Commission guidelines. New departments shall attain an ISO
Class 9 rating within two years of receiving fire tax funds to remain eligible. No new rescue
squads shall be funded within Covington County without prior approval of the Covington County
Commission.
(f) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department or rescue squad, any
remaining funds derived from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from
this amendment shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county
commission. The funds and assets shall be reallocated by the county commission equally to the
other fire departments and rescue squads. In the event there are no fire departments or rescue
squads, the funds or assets shall be placed in the county general fund.
(g) The personnel of fire departments and rescue squads provided for in this amendment shall not
be considered employees, servants or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of fire departments or rescue squads.
(h) Act No. 93-317, H. 825, 1993 Regular Session, is repealed.
(i) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Covington County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be
held at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in
Section 2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 565 565.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 565 RATIFIED 1995

Bingo Games in Covington County.
(a) The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations and
certain private clubs for charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in
Covington County, subject to any resolution or ordinance by the county commission as provided
by law regulating the operation of bingo. The county commission may promulgate rules and
regulations for issuing permits or licenses and for operating bingo games within the county. The
county commission shall insure compliance pursuant to any ordinance and the following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo.
(2) Except for special permit holders, no bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit
organization, unless the organization has been in existence for at least five years and has owned
real property in the county for five years immediately prior to the issuance of the permit or
license.
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization or club operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate of rental shall
not be based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from operating the bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization or club shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm,
association, or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on
behalf of the nonprofit organization. A nonprofit organization may not pay consulting fees or any
compensation or salary to any individual or entity for any services performed relating to
operating or conducting any bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization may not lend its name or allow any other person or entity to use its
identity in operating or advertising a bingo game in which the nonprofit organization is not
directly and solely operating the bingo game or concessions.
(6) One hundred percent of the net revenues derived from operating bingo games shall be
designated and expended for charitable or educational purposes.
(7) No person or organization, by whatever name or composition, shall take any expenses for
operating a bingo game except as permitted by law.
(b) The Legislature may, by local legislation, provide for the implementation of this amendment,
including, but not limited to, the imposition of criminal penalties for violations of this
amendment or the local legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 566 566.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 566 RATIFIED 1995

Election of Members of Cullman City Board of Education.
(a) The Legislature may by local act provide for the election of the members of the Cullman City
Board of Education.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Cullman County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
4 of this act, and no further election shall be required.
(c) Act No. 93-536 which provides for an elected Board of Education in the City of Cullman is
hereby ratified.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 567 567.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 567 RATIFIED 1995

Collection and Levying of Fees for Fire Protection Services and Emergency Medical Care in
Elmore County.
(a) The Legislature may from time to time by local law authorize the county governing body of
Elmore County to levy and collect fees, annually not to exceed $25.00 on each residence and
$50.00 on each business located within the county, for fire protection services and emergency
medical care, such local law may provide for the distribution of the fees to volunteer fire
departments and to emergency medical technicians who are members of volunteer fire
departments, or provide for the distribution of the fees to an association of volunteer fire
departments to be distributed by the association for the same purposes.
(b) Act No. 92-660, H. 63, 1992 Second Special Session, a proposed, but not ratified local
constitutional amendment, relating to the same subject matter, is repealed.
(c) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Elmore County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 568 568.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 568 RATIFIED 1995

Incorporation of Regional Airport Authority by City of Red Bay and Franklin County with
Political Subdivisions in Mississippi.

(a) The City of Red Bay and Franklin County may join with political subdivisions of the State of
Mississippi to organize a regional airport authority to be located in the State of Alabama or in the
State of Mississippi.
The regional airport authority shall be incorporated according to the laws of the State of Alabama
relative to the incorporation of airport authorities and shall have the same powers and authority
of airport authorities organized under the general laws of the State of Alabama. The
incorporation procedure shall be commenced by at least three natural persons, two of whom shall
be residents of the City of Red Bay, and the other or others may be residents of the political
subdivisions of the State of Mississippi. The incorporators shall be qualified electors of the
political subdivision which they represent.
The regional airport authority shall be governed by a board of directors as provided in the
certificate of incorporation or the bylaws. The governing body of each participating political
subdivision shall appoint one member to the board of directors.
The regional airport authority may issue and sell its interest-bearing revenue bonds for its
corporate purposes. The principal of and the interest on all bonds shall be payable solely from,
and may be secured by a pledge of the revenues derived by the regional authority from the
operation of any or all of its airports, facilities, and other property. The bonds issued or contracts
entered into by the authority shall not constitute or create an obligation or debt of this state or of
any county, city, or town within this state, or a charge against the credit or taxing powers of this
state or of any county, city, or town within this state.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Franklin County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 569 569.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 569 RATIFIED 1995

Bingo Games in Houston County.
(a) The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations and
certain private clubs for charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in
Houston County, subject to any resolution or ordinance by the county commission as provided by
law regulating the operation of bingo. The county commission may promulgate rules and
regulations for issuing permits or licenses and for operating bingo games within the county
jurisdiction. The county commission shall insure compliance pursuant to any ordinance and the
following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo.
(2) Except for special permit holders, no bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit
organization or qualified private club, unless the organization or club shall have been in
existence for at least five years and owned real property in the county for five years immediately
prior to issuing the permit or license, except the following:
a A fraternal, or benevolent, or charitable organization which qualifies as an exempt organization
under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
b A private club with annual membership dues of three hundred dollars (&dollar;300) or more.
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization or club operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate or rental shall
not be based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from operating the bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization or club shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm,
association, or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on
behalf of the nonprofit organization of club. No nonprofit organization or club may pay
consulting fees, any compensation or salary to any individual or entity for any services performed
relating to operating or conducting any bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization or club shall not lend its name or allow any other person or entity to
use its identity in operating or advertising a bingo game in which the nonprofit organization or
club is not directly and solely operating the bingo game or concessions.
(6) Prizes given by any qualified nonprofit organization or qualified private club for playing
bingo games shall not exceed the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value, set by the Legislature,
during any bingo session. The Legislature shall set a maximum amount for any calendar week.
(7) One hundred percent of the net revenues derived from operating bingo games shall be
designated and expended for charitable or educational purposes.
(8) No person, or organization, or club, by whatever name or composition, shall take any
expenses for operating a bingo game except as permitted by law.
(b) The Legislature may, by local legislation, provide for the implementation of this amendment,
including, but not limited to, the imposition of criminal penalties for violations of this
amendment or the local legislation.
(c) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Houston County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.
(d) Act No. 93-333, H. 717 of the 1993 Regular Session is repealed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 570 570.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 570 RATIFIED 1995

Police Jurisdiction and Planning and Zoning Authority of Municipalities in Lee County.

(a) In Lee County, the police jurisdiction and planning and zoning authority of any municipality
located partially within Lee County with the exception of the municipality of Notasulga shall not
extend beyond the corporate limits of the municipality. This amendment shall affect the authority
of a municipality located partially within Lee County only in Lee County.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Lee County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held at
the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section 2
of this act, and no further election shall be required.
(c) The provisions of this amendment restricting the planning and zoning authority of any
municipality affected by the amendment shall expire on June 30, 1997.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 571 571.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 571 RATIFIED 1995

Validation of Laws Regulating Court Costs in Sumter County.
(a) All general laws, local laws, and population based laws previously enacted by the Legislature
and which are in effect on January 1, 1994, pertaining to or applicable to Sumter County which
in whole or in part regulate costs and charges of courts are hereby ratified, approved, validated,
and confirmed as of the date of their enactment. Any actions taken or payments made in
accordance with those laws are hereby ratified, approved, validated, and confirmed. This
amendment shall not be construed as prohibiting the Legislature from properly enacting a law to
amend or repeal those laws.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Sumter County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 572 572.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 572 RATIFIED 1995

Establishment of Fire Districts and Levy of Charges for Fire Protection and Emergency Medical
Services in Tallapoosa County.
(a) Upon approval of the E911 Board of Commissioners of Tallapoosa County, districts may be
established for fire protection and emergency medical services within the geographical
boundaries of Tallapoosa County. Each district for fire fighting and emergency medical services
of Tallapoosa County is authorized, in its discretion, to levy a service charge for fire protection
and emergency medical services in an amount it deems reasonable on each dwelling and
commercial building in Tallapoosa County. A service charge if approved by the majority of the
voters residing in the proposed fire district shall be collected by the board of directors of the
proposed district that has response coverage for the district unless otherwise provided by law.
The proceeds from the service charge less any costs of collection shall be used by the district for
fire protection and emergency medical service.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Tallapoosa County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be
held at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in
Section 2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 573 573.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 573 RATIFIED 1995

Ad Valorem Tax in Morgan County.
(a) In lieu of the ad valorem taxes otherwise authorized by Section 269 and Amendment 3 to the
Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and enabling statutory provisions thereto, the Morgan County
Commission may levy annually, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad
valorem tax on all taxable property located in Morgan County, Alabama at a rate of 5.8 mill per
dollar assessed value of the property, the proceeds of which shall be distributed to the Board of
Education of Morgan County in proportions as the proceeds would be distributable if the taxes
were levied under the authority of Section 269 and Amendment 3 and enabling statutory
provisions relating thereto.
(b) The authority conferred by this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing in the event
this amendment is duly adopted and ratified at the election required by the act which this
amendment is proposed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 574 574.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 574 RATIFIED 1995

Ad Valorem Tax in City of Hartselle.
(a) In lieu of the special district school tax of forty cents per one hundred dollars of assessed
value which the Morgan County Commission is authorized to levy for the benefit of the public
schools in the City of Hartselle, Alabama, the Morgan County Commission shall be authorized to
levy on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad valorem
tax on all taxable property located within the City of Hartselle, at a rate of four mills per dollar of
assessed value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be distributed to the Hartselle
City Board of Education.
(b) The authority conferred by this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing in the event
this amendment is duly adopted and ratified at the election required by the act by which this
amendment is proposed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 575 575.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 575 RATIFIED 1995

Additional Ad Valorem Tax within Portion of City of Decatur in Morgan County.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes which the Morgan County Commission is authorized
by law to levy for the benefit of the public schools in the City of Decatur, Alabama, the Morgan
County Commission shall be authorized to levy on an annual basis, commencing with the tax
year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad valorem tax on all taxable property located within that
portion of the City of Decatur which lies in Morgan County at the rate of 3.6 mills per dollar of
assessed value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be distributed to the Decatur
City Board of Education.
(b) The authority conferred by this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing in the event
this amendment is duly adopted and ratified at the election required by the act by which this
amendment is proposed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 576 576.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 576 RATIFIED 1995

Additional Ad Valorem Tax on Property in Morgan County Outside Cities of Decatur and
Hartselle.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes which the Morgan County Commission is authorized
by law to levy for the benefit of the public schools within the jurisdiction of the Morgan County
Board of Education, the Morgan County Commission may levy on an annual basis, commencing
with the tax year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad valorem tax on all taxable property in Morgan
County located outside the corporate limits of the City of Decatur and the City of Hartselle, as
those corporate limits exist on the first day of each ad valorem tax year, at a rate of four mills per
dollar of assessed value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be distributed to the
Morgan County Board of Education.
(b) The authority conferred by this constitutional amendment shall be self-executing in the event
this amendment is duly adopted and ratified at the election required by the act by which this
amendment is proposed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 577 577.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 577 RATIFIED 1995

Manner of Filling Vacancies on Morgan County Board of Education.
The Legislature may, by local act, provide for the manner of filling vacancies on the Morgan
County Board of Education.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 578 578.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1995 ***

AMENDMENT 578 RATIFIED 1995

Election of Franklin County Superintendent of Education by Qualified Electors.
(a) The Franklin County Superintendent of Education shall be elected by the qualified electors
residing in the jurisdiction of the Franklin County School System. The initial county
superintendent of education elected pursuant to this amendment shall be elected at the general
election in 1996. The election shall be conducted in the same manner as the election of other
county officers. The initial county superintendent of education elected pursuant to this
amendment shall serve upon election until June 30, 2001. A successor shall be elected at the
general election in 2000 and take office on July 1, 2001. Successors shall serve a term of four
years from July 1 of the year following election and shall be elected at the general election
immediately preceding the expiration of the term of the incumbent. The Franklin County
Superintendent of Education shall be a resident of the area served by the Franklin County School
System at the time of his or her election and shall possess all the qualifications of a county
superintendent of education provided by general law. The Legislature may, from time to time,
enact laws to implement and facilitate the purposes of this amendment.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved by a majority of the qualified
electors residing in the jurisdiction of the Franklin County School System and a majority of the
qualified electors of Franklin County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 579 000.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 579 RATIFIED 1996

Amendment of Article VIII.
Article VIII of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 is hereby repealed and in lieu thereof the
following article shall be adopted.
(a) Every citizen of the United States who has attained the age of eighteen years and has resided
in this state and in a county thereof for the time provided by law, if registered as provided by law,
shall have the right to vote in the county of his or her residence. The Legislature may prescribe
reasonable and nondiscriminatory requirements as prerequisites to registration for voting. The
Legislature shall, by statute, prescribe a procedure by which eligible citizens can register to vote.
(b) No person convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, or who is mentally incompetent,
shall be qualified to vote until restoration of civil and political rights or removal of disability.
(c) The Legislature shall by law provide for the registration of voters, absentee voting, secrecy in
voting, the administration of elections, and the nomination of candidates.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 908 177.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 177, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 909 178.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 178, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 910 179.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 179, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 911 180.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 180, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 912 181.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 181, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 913 182.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 182, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 914 183.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 183, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 915 184.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 184, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 916 185.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 185, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 917 186.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 186, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 918 187.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 187, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 919 188.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 188, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 920 189.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 189, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 921 190.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 190, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 922 191.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 191, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 923 192.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 192, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 924 193.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 193, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 925 194.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 194, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 926 195.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 195, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 927 196.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

Section 196, Article 8, Repealed.  Replaced by new article 8, see amendment #579

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 580 006.18A 006.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 580 RATIFIED 1996

Amendment of Article VI.
SECTION 6.18A
Impeachment provisions in Article VII, Section 173 to apply to Supreme Court Justices and
appellate judges.
In addition to the authority conferred on the Court of the Judiciary in Section 6.18, the provisions
for impeachment in Article VII, Section 173, shall also apply to Justices of the Supreme Court
and Judges of the Courts of Appeals. No proceeding for impeachment under Article VII, Section
173, may proceed or be initiated against a judge while the same charge or subject matter is under
consideration by the Judicial Inquiry Commission or the Court of the Judiciary. A finding of lack
of probable cause or a termination of proceeding without a finding of wrongdoing by either the
Judicial Inquiry Commission or the Court of the Judiciary shall constitute a complete defense to
proceedings of impeachment under Article VII, Section 173, and shall bar all further proceedings
of impeachment as to the same charge or subject matter. No justice or judge who has been tried
before the Court of the Judiciary shall be subject to impeachment on the same charge or subject
matter. No conduct that occurred prior to the effective date of this amendment may be the basis
of a proceeding of impeachment under this section. No proceeding in impeachment under this
section may be initiated without the verification, under oath, of at least 12 members of the House
of Representatives as to the factual basis of the charge under which the article of impeachment is
preferred. No article of impeachment shall be passed upon less than two- thirds majority of the
House of Representatives and no conviction of impeachment shall be had upon less than two-
thirds majority of the Senate under this section. Dissatisfaction with the ruling of a judge or
justice shall not be a ground upon which impeachment under this section may proceed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 581 006.18 006.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 581 RATIFIED 1996

Amendment of Article VI.
SECTION 6.18
Court of the Judiciary.
(a) The Court of the Judiciary is created consisting of one judge of an appellate court, other than
the Supreme Court, who shall be selected by the Supreme Court and shall serve as Chief Judge of
the Court of the Judiciary; two judges of the circuit court, who shall be selected by the Circuit
Judges' Association; and one district judge who shall be selected by the District Judges'
Association. Other members of the Court of the Judiciary shall consist of two members of the
state bar, who shall be selected by the governing body of the Alabama State Bar; two persons
who are not lawyers who shall be appointed by the Governor; and one person appointed by the
Lieutenant Governor. Members appointed by the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall be
subject to Senate confirmation before serving. Provided, however, that on January 1, 2005, the
appointment authority granted to the Lieutenant Governor shall revert to the Governor and the
Governor shall thereafter be entitled to appoint three persons who are not lawyers, subject to
Senate confirmation. The court shall be convened to hear complaints filed by the Judicial Inquiry
Commission. The court shall have authority, after notice and public hearing (1) to remove from
office, suspend without pay, or censure a judge, or apply such other sanction as may prescribed
by law, for violation of a Canon of Judicial Ethics, misconduct in office, failure to perform his or
her duties, or (2) to suspend with or without pay, or to retire a judge who is physically or
mentally unable to perform his or her duties.
(b) A judge aggrieved by a decision of the Court of the Judiciary may appeal to the Supreme
Court. The Supreme Court shall review the record of the proceedings on the law and the facts.
(c) The Supreme Court shall adopt rules governing the procedures of the Court of the Judiciary.
(d) The Court of the Judiciary shall have power to issue subpoenas. The Legislature shall provide
by law for the expenses of the court.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 582 582.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 582 RATIFIED 1996

Approval of Legislature for Court Orders Requiring Disbursement of State Funds.
No order of a state court, which requires disbursement of state funds, shall be binding on the
state or any state official until the order has been approved by a simple majority of both houses of
the Legislature. This amendment shall not apply to orders, judgments, or decrees requiring
payment of compensation for the taking of property by eminent domain or arising out of
challenges to taxation or to such other orders, judgments, or decrees as may be otherwise
required by statute, or settled principles of Alabama common law as decided by the Alabama
appellate courts, not inconsistent with other provisions of this Constitution. Nothing herein shall
be construed to preclude a court from making findings of fact or conclusions of law and orders
relating thereto, that standards required by the United States Constitution, the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901, laws of this state or of the United States, or rules or regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, are not being met, and from ordering the responsible entity or entities to comply
with such standards.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 583 583.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 583 RATIFIED 1996

Collection and Levying of Fees for Fire Protection Services in Calhoun County.
The Legislature declares that the fire departments which receive funds pursuant to this
amendment are organizations which are public in nature as they promote and protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, there shall be levied and collected
in Calhoun County a special county-wide property tax of three mills on each one dollar's worth of
taxable property as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation. The proceeds of the additional
taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire protection services provided by
volunteer and full-time fire departments.
The Tax Assessor of Calhoun County shall assess the tax herein provided for and the tax
collector shall collect the tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are
collected. The proceeds of the tax shall be paid by the tax collector directly to the Calhoun
County Volunteer Firefighters' Association and to the cities. The proceeds shall be divided so
that the proceeds of the tax collected within the corporate limits of any city within the county
shall be allocated to the fire department of that city and the proceeds from collections in the
unincorporated areas of the county shall be allocated among the volunteer fire departments which
serve the unincorporated area of the county, based on the following formula:
(a) One-third of the proceeds shall be equally divided among the volunteer fire departments
which are in good standing with the Calhoun County Volunteer Firefighters' Association.
(b) One-third of the proceeds shall be divided to each volunteer fire department based upon the
number of people who live within each respective fire district.
(c) One-third of the proceeds shall be divided to each volunteer fire department based upon the
number of acres of land contained in each fire district.
From the proceeds collected in the police jurisdiction, but outside the corporate limits, of any
city, one-third shall be allocated for the city serving the police jurisdiction and two-thirds shall be
allocated to the Calhoun County Volunteer Firefighters' Association to be divided as herein
prescribed.
An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in Calhoun
County which is a member in good standing with the Calhoun County Volunteer Firefighters'
Association according to guidelines established by the Alabama Volunteer Fire Department
Association.
Funds paid to eligible fire departments shall be expended for fire protection and rescue services
including training, supplies, equipment, and facilities. The funds may also be expended to
purchase insurance to insure coverage of acts or omissions which are directly related to the
functions of a fire department which are committed by the department or the personnel of a fire
department and to insure assets of the fire department. The funds may not be expended for food,
drink, social activities, salaries, or fund-raising activities. After receiving funds, the fire
departments shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds were properly expended. The
records shall reasonably be open to the public for inspection. By September 15 of each year, the
association shall file a financial statement with the Calhoun County Commission detailing the
expenditure of all funds received from this amendment during the previous 12 months. The filing
shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. No
new fire departments shall be funded within Calhoun County without prior approval of the
Calhoun County Volunteer Firefighters' Association.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department, any remaining funds derived
from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from this amendment shall,
after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the Calhoun County Volunteer
Firefighters' Association. The funds and assets shall be reallocated by the association to the other
fire departments based upon the formula previously set out in this amendment. In the event the
association is dissolved, the additional property tax levied under this amendment shall end and
no longer be levied and collected.
The personnel of fire departments provided for in this amendment shall not be considered
employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county commission and the
employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or in a private capacity
for the actions of the personnel of fire departments.
This amendment shall apply to collections of ad valorem taxes for the 1996-97 tax year and
thereafter. The initial provisions of this amendment may hereafter be amended by local
legislation which may become effective without referendum approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 584 584.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 584 RATIFIED 1996

Commission Authorized to Levy Ad Valorem Tax for Fire Protection and Rescue Services in
Cherokee County.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Cherokee County Commission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad valorem tax
on all taxable property located in Cherokee County at a rate of two mills per dollar of assessed
value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be paid into the county general fund
and allocated therefrom for fire protection and rescue services.
(b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund of the proceeds from the additional
tax levied pursuant to (a), the county commission shall pay the proceeds generated by one and
one-half mills of the additional tax levied to the Cherokee County Association of Volunteer Fire
Departments and the proceeds generated from one-half of one mill to the Cherokee County
Rescue Service Inc. The association shall divide its funds equally among the member fire
departments of the Cherokee County Association of Volunteer Fire Departments and allocate one
share thereof to the association at the quarterly meetings of the association.
(c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including day to day operations, training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and
equipment. An eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located
in Cherokee County which is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission
and is a member in good standing of the Cherokee County Association of Volunteer Fire
Departments. Any tax proceeds allocated for fire protection and rescue services under this
amendment shall not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or fundraising
activities. After receiving funds, the volunteer fire departments shall keep accurate records to
verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15th of each year, each fire
department and the county association shall file a form with the county association detailing the
expenditures of all funds during the previous 12 months and setting out a schedule of all
proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent
funds have been obligated. The county association shall supply the accounting forms to each
eligible volunteer fire department and the county association.
(d) Funds paid to the Cherokee County Rescue Service Inc. shall only be expended for rescue
services, including day to day operations, training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and
equipment. In order for the Cherokee County Rescue Service to maintain eligibility for tax
proceeds it shall maintain current active membership in the Alabama Association of Rescue
Squads. After receiving funds, the Cherokee County Rescue Service Inc. shall keep accurate
records to verify that funds were properly expended.
(e) All funds collected and disbursed under this amendment shall be subject to audit by the State
Department of Examiners of Public Accounts.
(f) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.
(g) Upon dissolution or abandonment of the Cherokee County Rescue Service Inc. any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be held in the county general fund, until a
decision can be reached by all applicable parties regarding the restoration of rescue service and
the transfer of the funds for rescue services.
(h) The personnel of volunteer fire departments and the Cherokee County Rescue Service shall
not be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of volunteer fire departments and the
Cherokee County Rescue Service Inc.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 585 585.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 585 RATIFIED 1996

Collection and Levying of Fees for Fire Protection and Safety Services in Clay County
The Legislature declares that the fire departments and rescue squads which receive funds
pursuant to this amendment are organizations which are public in nature as they promote and
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, there shall be levied and collected
in Clay County a special property tax of two mills on each one dollar's worth of taxable property
as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation during the preceding year. The proceeds of the
additional taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire protection and safety
services.
The Revenue Commissioner of Clay County shall assess the tax herein provided for and shall
collect the tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are collected. The
proceeds of the tax shall be paid by the commissioner directly to the Clay County Volunteer Fire
Department Association. The proceeds shall be divided by the association among the eligible
volunteer fire departments and rescue squads so that the proceeds of the tax collected within the
corporate limits of the Cities of Ashland and Lineville shall be allocated proportionately to the
volunteer fire departments of those cities and any rescue squads serving those cities, and the
proceeds from collections in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be allocated equally
among the volunteer fire departments and the rescue squads which serve the unincorporated areas
of the county. The rescue squads shall also receive the same percentage of the proceeds
distributed proportionately to Ashland and Lineville which the rescue squads receive from the
county portion of the proceeds.
An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in Clay
County which is a member in good standing with the Clay County Volunteer Fire Department
Association according to guidelines established by the Alabama Volunteer Fire Department
Association.
An eligible rescue squad for purposes of this amendment, means a rescue squad in Clay County
which is in good standing according to guidelines established by the Alabama Association of
Rescue Squads.
Funds paid to eligible fire departments and rescue squads shall only be expended for fire
protection and safety services including training, supplies, and equipment. The funds may also be
expended to purchase liability insurance to insure coverage of acts or omissions which are
directly related to the functions of a fire department or rescue squad which are committed by the
department or squad or the personnel of a fire department or rescue squad. The funds may not be
expended for food, drink, social activities, salaries, or fund-raising activities. After receiving
funds, the fire departments and rescue squads shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds
were properly expended. By September 15 of each year, the association shall file a financial
statement with the Clay County Commission detailing the expenditure of all funds received from
this amendment during the previous 12 months. The filing shall also account for all unspent
funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. No new fire departments or rescue
squads shall be funded within Clay County without prior approval of the Clay County Volunteer
Fire Department Association.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department or rescue squad, any remaining
funds derived from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from this
amendment shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the Clay County
Volunteer Fire Department Association. The funds and assets shall be reallocated by the
association equally to the other fire departments and rescue squads. In the event the association is
dissolved, the additional property tax levied under this amendment shall self-destruct and no
longer be levied and collected.
The personnel of fire departments and rescue squads provided for in this amendment shall not be
considered employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of fire departments or rescue squads.
This amendment shall apply to collections of ad valorem taxes for the 1995-96 tax year and
thereafter. The initial provisions of this amendment may hereafter be amended by local
legislation which may become effective without referendum approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 586 586.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 586 RATIFIED 1996

Collection and Levying of Fees for Fire Protection Services in Cleburne County.
The Legislature declares that the fire departments which receive funds pursuant to this
amendment are organizations which are public in nature as they promote and protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, there shall be levied and collected
in Cleburne County a special property tax of two mills on each one dollar's worth of taxable
property as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation during the preceding year. The proceeds of
the additional taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire protection
services.
The Revenue Commissioner of Cleburne County shall assess the tax herein provided for and
shall collect the tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are collected.
The proceeds of the tax shall be paid by the commissioner directly to the Cleburne County
Volunteer Fire Department Association. The proceeds shall be divided by the association among
the eligible volunteer fire departments in the county.
An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in
Cleburne County which is a member in good standing with the Cleburne County Volunteer Fire
Department Association according to guidelines established by the Alabama Volunteer Fire
Department Association.
Funds paid to eligible fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection services
including training, supplies, and equipment. The funds may also be expended to purchase
liability insurance to insure coverage of acts or omissions which are directly related to the
functions of a fire department which are committed by the department or the personnel of a fire
department. The funds may not be expended for food, drink, social activities, salaries, or fund-
raising activities. After receiving funds, the fire departments shall keep accurate records to verify
that the funds were properly expended. By September 15 of each year, the association shall file a
financial statement with the Cleburne County Commission detailing the expenditure of all funds
received from this amendment during the previous 12 months. The filing shall also account for
all unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. No new fire departments
shall be funded within Cleburne County without prior approval of the Cleburne County
Volunteer Fire Department Association.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department, any remaining funds derived
from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from this amendment shall,
after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the Cleburne County Volunteer Fire
Department Association. The funds and assets shall be reallocated by the association equally to
the other fire departments. In the event the association is dissolved, the additional property tax
levied under this amendment shall self-destruct and no longer be levied and collected.
The personnel of fire departments provided for in this amendment shall not be considered
employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county commission and the
employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or in a private capacity
for the actions of the personnel of fire departments.
This amendment shall apply to collections of ad valorem taxes for the 1995-96 tax year and
thereafter. The initial provisions of this amendment may hereafter be amended by local
legislation which may become effective without referendum approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 587 587.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 587 RATIFIED 1996

Business License Taxes on Real Estate Operations and Transactions in Etowah County.
(a) In order to allow for the orderly and efficient collection of municipal business license taxes in
Etowah County with respect to corporations, firms, brokers, agents, and others in the business of
buying, selling, leasing, or representing others in the purchase, sale or lease of real property in
Etowah County, the Legislature may, by local law, provide for the imposition and collection of
taxes as follows:
(1) Any city or municipality within Etowah County may fix and collect licenses pursuant to
Sections 11-51-90 and 11-51-91, Code of Alabama 1975, for any business, trade, or profession
relating to the buying, selling, or renting of real estate on commission in Etowah County if the
licensee maintains its principal place of business in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of
that city or municipality.
(2) Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter, in
addition to the taxes, if any, imposed under (1) above, every corporation, firm, broker, agent, or
other person or entity engaged in the business of buying, selling, managing, leasing, or renting of
real estate on commission in Etowah County shall pay an annual business license tax at a rate to
be set by the city and county for the privilege of engaging in that business in every other city or
municipality in Etowah County. The tax shall be collected by the License Commissioner of
Etowah County and shall be distributed by the License Commissioner of Etowah County to each
city or municipality within Etowah County on a pro rata basis based on population. The License
Commissioner of Etowah County shall be entitled to an administrative fee for administering this
tax at a rate to be set by the Legislature. The fee shall be added to the license tax.
(3) Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter,
except, for the licenses permitted or mandated under (1) or (2) above, no other privilege license
tax or any other fee or tax shall be imposed under Sections 11-51-90 and 11-51-91, Code of
Alabama 1975, or any other law by any city or municipality within Etowah County on
corporations, firms, brokers, agents, or other persons or entities engaged in the business of
buying, selling, managing, leasing, or renting of real estate on commission in Etowah County.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Etowah County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 588 588.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 588 RATIFIED 1996

Election of Franklin County Superintendent of Education by Qualified Electors.
(a) The Franklin County Superintendent of Education shall be elected by the qualified electors
residing in the jurisdiction of the Franklin County School System. The initial county
superintendent of education elected pursuant to this amendment shall be elected at the general
election in 1996. The election shall be conducted in the same manner as the election of other
county officers. The initial county superintendent of education elected pursuant to this
amendment shall serve from the date elected and certified until June 30, 2001. A successor shall
be elected at the general election in 2000 and take office on July 1, 2001. Successors shall serve a
term of four years from July 1 of the year following election and shall be elected at the general
election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of the incumbent. The Franklin County
Superintendent of Education shall be a resident of the area served by the Franklin County School
System at the time of his or her election and shall possess all the qualifications of a county
superintendent of education provided by general law. The Legislature may, from time to time,
enact laws to implement and facilitate the purposes of this amendment.
(b) Any contract of any appointed county superintendent of education shall terminate on the date
the elected county superintendent of education takes office.
(c) Any actions taken pursuant to the constitutional amendment proposed by Act 95-224, H. 80,
1995 Regular Session are ratified, validated, and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 589 589.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 589 RATIFIED 1996

Phase-out of Supernumerary Program for Certain Elected Public Officials in Houston County;
Participation in Employees' Retirement System.
No person elected or appointed sheriff, or any elected or appointed Houston County official, may
assume a supernumerary office after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on
the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may
continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a
supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that
supernumerary program. Every sheriff and elected or appointed Houston County official may
participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions
as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same retirement system. Houston
County officials holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible
to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official has
served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a
supernumerary office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed
county official" shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or
appointed county official, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator, constable,
school board member, or any official elected from a judicial circuit.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 590 590.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 590 RATIFIED 1996

Regulation and Alteration of Costs and Charges of Courts in Lauderdale County.
The Legislature may, from time to time, by general or local law applicable to Lauderdale County,
fix, regulate, and alter the costs and charges of court in the county. This amendment shall be
construed together with Amendment 241.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 591 591.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 591 RATIFIED 1996

Election of Two Persons to Electrical Utility Owned by City of Tuskegee.
Two persons shall be elected to the electrical utility owned by the City of Tuskegee at the same
time that the mayor and city council elections are held and the elected candidates for members of
the electrical utility shall qualify for office in the same manner. The election shall be conducted
in the same manner as that for the election for city council. In the interim of the time between the
adoption of this amendment and the mayor-city council election, the State Senator and the
Alabama House Representative representing the City of Tuskegee shall each appoint a member
on the electrical utility board owned by the City of Tuskegee to serve, only during the interim
period until the election. The members of the board of directors of the electrical utility who are
not members of the city council shall each receive fifty dollars ($50) per meeting, not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100) per month.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 592 592.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 592 RATIFIED 1996

Phase-out of Supernumerary Program for Certain Elected Public Officials in Morgan County;
Participation in Employees' Retirement System.
No elected or appointed Morgan County official may assume a supernumerary office after the
effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is
entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Morgan County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Morgan County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board member, or any official elected from a
judicial circuit.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 593 593.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 593 RATIFIED 1996

Commission Authorized to Levy Ad Valorem Tax for Fire Protection in Perry County.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Perry County Commission may levy on an
annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1995, an ad valorem tax on all
taxable property located in Perry County at a rate of three mills per dollar of assessed value of the
taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be paid into the county general fund and distributed
for the benefit of fire protection.
(b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay the
funds to the Perry County Association of Volunteer Fire Departments. The county association
shall divide the funds equally among all eligible volunteer fire departments and the Alabama
Forestry Commission at the quarterly meetings of the county association. The county commission
and the county association may jointly establish rules regarding the transfer, investing,
accounting, and handling of the funds.
(c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. An
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in Perry County
that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission and is a member in
good standing of the Perry County Association of Volunteer Fire Departments. The funds may
not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or fund-raising activities. After
receiving funds, the volunteer fire departments shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds
were properly expended. By September 15th of each year, each department and the Alabama
Forestry Commission shall file a form with the county association detailing the expenditures of
all funds during the previous 12 months and setting out a schedule of all proposed projects. The
filing shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated.
The county association shall supply the accounting forms to each eligible volunteer fire
department and the Alabama Forestry Commission.
(d) The Alabama Forestry Commission's share of these funds collected shall be used in Perry
County only. The funds shall be used for buildings and purchase of equipment. The funds shall
not be expended for salaries.
(e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.
(f) The personnel of volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall not
be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of volunteer fire departments and the
Alabama Forestry Commission.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 594 594.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 594 RATIFIED 1996

Collection and Levying of Fees for Fire Protection and Safety Services in Randolph County.
The Legislature declares that the fire departments and rescue squads which receive funds
pursuant to this amendment are organizations which are public in nature as they promote and
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, there shall be levied and collected
in Randolph County a special property tax of two mills on each one dollar's worth of taxable
property as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation during the preceding year. The proceeds of
the additional taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire protection and
safety services.
The Revenue Commissioner of Randolph County shall assess the tax herein provided for and
shall collect the tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are collected.
The proceeds of the tax shall be paid by the commissioner directly to the Randolph County
Volunteer Fire Department Association. The proceeds shall be divided by the association so that
the proceeds of the tax collected within the corporate limits of the City of Roanoke shall be
allocated to the volunteer fire department of the city and the proceeds from collections in the
unincorporated areas of the county shall be allocated equally among the volunteer fire
departments and the rescue squad which serve the unincorporated area of the county.
An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in
Randolph County which is a member in good standing with the Randolph County Volunteer Fire
Department Association according to guidelines established by the Alabama Volunteer Fire
Department Association.
An eligible rescue squad for purposes of this amendment, means a rescue squad in Randolph
County which is in good standing according to guidelines established by the Alabama
Association of Rescue Squads.
Funds paid to eligible fire departments and rescue squads shall only be expended for fire
protection and safety services including training, supplies, and equipment. The funds may also be
expended to purchase liability insurance to insure coverage of acts or omissions which are
directly related to the functions of a fire department or rescue squad which are committed by the
department or squad or the personnel of a fire department or rescue squad. The funds may not be
expended for food, drink, social activities, salaries, or fund-raising activities. After receiving
funds, the fire departments and rescue squads shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds
were properly expended. By September 15 of each year, the association shall file a financial
statement with the Randolph County Commission detailing the expenditure of all funds received
from this amendment during the previous 12 months. The filing shall also account for all unspent
funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. No new fire departments or rescue
squads shall be funded within Randolph County without prior approval of the Randolph County
Volunteer Fire Department Association.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department or rescue squad, any remaining
funds derived from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from this
amendment shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the Randolph County
Volunteer Fire Department Association. The funds and assets shall be reallocated by the
association equally to the other fire departments and rescue squads. In the event the association is
dissolved, the additional property tax levied under this amendment shall self-destruct and no
longer be levied and collected.
The personnel of fire departments and rescue squads provided for in this amendment shall not be
considered employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of fire departments or rescue squads.
This amendment shall apply to collections of ad valorem taxes for the 1995-96 tax year and
thereafter. The initial provisions of this amendment may hereafter be amended by local
legislation which may become effective without referendum approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 595 595.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***
 
AMENDMENT 595 RATIFIED 1996

Business License Taxes on Real Estate Operations and Transactions in Shelby County.
(a) In order to allow for the orderly and efficient collection of municipal business license taxes in
Shelby County with respect to corporations, firms, brokers, agents, and others in the business of
buying, selling, leasing, or representing others in the purchase, sale, or lease of real property in
Shelby County, the Legislature may, by local law, provide for the imposition and collection of
taxes as follows:
1 Any city or municipality within Shelby County may fix and collect licenses pursuant to
Sections 11-51-90 and 11-51-91, Code of Alabama 1975, for any business, trade, or profession
relating to the buying, selling, or renting of real estate on commission in Shelby County if the
licensee maintains its principal place of business in the corporate limits or police jurisdiction of
that city or municipality.
2 Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter, in
addition to the taxes, if any, imposed under 1. above, every corporation, firm, broker, agent, or
other person or entity engaged in the business of buying, selling, managing, leasing, or renting of
real estate on commission in Shelby County shall pay an annual business license tax at a rate to
be set by the Legislature for the privilege of engaging in that business in every other city or
municipality in Shelby County. The tax shall be collected by the License Commissioner of
Shelby County and shall be distributed by the License Commissioner of Shelby County to each
city or municipality within Shelby County on a pro rata basis based on population. The License
Commissioner of Shelby County shall be entitled to an administrative fee for administering this
tax at a rate to be set by the Legislature. The fee shall to be added to the license tax.
3 Effective January 1, following the ratification of this amendment and each year thereafter,
except for the licenses permitted or mandated under 1. and 2. above, no other privilege license
tax or any other fee or tax shall be imposed under Sections 11-51-90 and 11-51-91, Code of
Alabama 1975, or any other law by any city or municipality within Shelby County on
corporations, firms, brokers, agents, or other persons or entities engaged in the business of
buying, selling, managing, leasing, or renting of real estate on commission in Shelby County.
(b) This amendment shall not become effective unless approved at a referendum by a majority of
the qualified electors of Shelby County voting on the proposition. The referendum shall be held
at the same time as the election for the ratification of this amendment, as provided for in Section
2 of this act, and no further election shall be required.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 596 596.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 596 RATIFIED 1996

Promotion of Economic and Industrial Development in Walker County.
For the promotion of local economic and industrial development of Walker County, Walker
County and each municipality the corporate limits of which are located wholly in the county
shall, other provisions of law or this constitution notwithstanding, have, independently or in
cooperation with one or more of such governmental entities, full and continuing power to do all
of the following:
(1) To purchase, lease, or otherwise acquire land, or to utilize land heretofore purchased or
otherwise acquired, and to improve and develop such land for use as industrial sites or industrial
park projects, including, but not limited to, grading and the construction of roads, drainage,
sewers, sewage and waste disposal systems, parking areas, and utilities to serve those sites or
projects.
(2) To lease, sell, grant, exchange, or otherwise convey, on terms approved by the governing
body of the county or any such municipality, as applicable, all or any part of any site or project to
any person, firm, or corporation, public or private, including any industrial development board,
other public corporation or authority heretofore or hereafter created by the county or any
municipality therein, for the purpose of constructing or developing, by a purchaser or lessee, and
equipping and operating, industrial, transportation, distribution, warehouse or research facilities,
and offices and other facilities auxiliary to the foregoing.
(3) To grant public funds to the industrial development boards, public corporations, or
authorities.
Any action referred to in subdivision (1), (2), and (3) which has been taken subsequent to January
1, 1996, is ratified, approved, and confirmed. Nothing herein shall authorize the county, or any
municipality therein, to construct buildings for the purpose of lease or sale.
In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither Walker County nor any municipality
located wholly within Walker County shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 93 or 94 of
this constitution, as amended. The Legislature shall have the power, by special or local law, to
create, or provide for the creation of, any public corporation, authority, board, agency, or other
entity empowered or intended to assist or aid in any way the county or the municipality in
carrying out the purposes of this amendment and the special or local law shall not be subject to
the provisions of Sections 104 and 106 of this constitution, as amended. This amendment shall
be self-executing and the powers granted hereby may be exercised as an alternative to, or
cumulative with, and in no way restrictive of, powers otherwise granted by law to the county, or
to any municipality, or to any agency, board, or authority created pursuant to the laws of this state
and acting pursuant to this amendment.
No action may be taken under this amendment by the county or any of the municipalities until
after the question of whether the county and the municipalities shall have the authority to take the
action shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the county, at an election called for that
purpose by the governing body of the county and a majority of the qualified electors voting at the
election vote in favor of the county and the municipalities having the authority to take action.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 597 597.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 597 RATIFIED 1996

Sportsperson's Bill of Rights.
(a) All persons shall have the right to hunt and fish in this state in accordance with law and
regulations.
(b) This amendment shall be known as the "Sportsperson's Bill of Rights."

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 598 008.0 014.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 598 RATIFIED 1996

Amendment of Article XIV, Section 8.
Article XIV, Section 8, as amended by Amendment 37 of the Constitution of Alabama 1901, is
amended to read as follows:
"Sec. 8. No person shall for any indictable offense be proceeded against criminally by
information, except in cases arising in the militia and volunteer forces when in actual service, or
when assembled under arms as a military organization, or, by leave of the court, for misfeasance,
misdemeanor, extortion, and oppression in office, otherwise than is provided in the Constitution.
In cases of misdemeanor, the Legislature may by law dispense with a grand jury and authorize
prosecutions and proceedings before any inferior courts as may be by law established. In all
felony cases, except those punishable by capital punishment, the Legislature may by law dispense
with a grand jury and authorize prosecutions and proceedings in any manner as may be provided
by law if the defendant, after having had the advice of counsel of his or her choice or in the event
he or she is unable to employ counsel, the advice of counsel which shall be appointed by the
court, makes known in open court to a judge of a court having jurisdiction of the offense that he
or she desires to plead guilty."

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 599 599.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 599 RATIFIED 1996

Bingo Games in Morgan County.
(a) The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by nonprofit organizations for charitable,
educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal only within the boundaries of the Cities of
Hartselle and Falkville and that area of the City of Decatur located within the boundaries of
Morgan County, subject to any resolution or ordinance by the governing bodies of the respective
cities and towns, within their respective jurisdictions. The governing bodies may promulgate
rules and regulations for the licensing and operation of bingo games, within their respective
jurisdictions. The governing bodies shall insure compliance pursuant to any ordinance and the
following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 years shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo,
nor shall any person under the age of 19 years be permitted to conduct or assist in the operation
of any game of bingo.
(2) No bingo license shall be issued to any nonprofit organization, unless the organization shall
have been in existence for at least three years in the county immediately prior to the issuance of
the permit or license.
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate of rental shall not be
based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from the operation of bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association,
or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on behalf of
the nonprofit organization. No nonprofit organization shall pay consulting fees to any individual
or entity for any services performed in relation to the operation or conduct of a bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name or allow its identity to be used by any other
person or entity in the operating or advertising of a bingo game in which the nonprofit
organization is not directly and solely operating the bingo game.
(6) Prizes given by any nonprofit organization for the playing of bingo games shall not exceed
the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value set by the Legislature during any bingo session
during any calendar week.
(7) No person or organization, by whatever name or composition thereof, shall take any expense
for the operation of a bingo game except as permitted by law.
(b) The Legislature may, by local legislation, provide for the implementation of this amendment,
including, but not limited to, the imposition of criminal penalties for violations of this
amendment or the local legislation.
(c) The Legislature, may by local law, provide for the operation of bingo games for prizes or
money by nonprofit organizations for charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes within any
other city located within the boundaries of Morgan County pursuant to subsection (a) of Section
1 of this constitutional amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 600 386.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 600 RATIFIED 1996
Amendment of Amendment No. 386.
Operation of Bingo Games By Nonprofit Organizations in Jefferson County.

The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by nonprofit organizations for charitable or
educational purposes shall be legal in Jefferson county, subject to the provisions of any
resolution or ordinance by the county governing body or the governing bodies of the respective
cities and towns, within their respective jurisdictions. The said governing bodies shall have the
authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the licensing and operation of bingo games,
within their respective jurisdictions, provided, however, that said governing bodies must insure
compliance with the following provisions:

(a) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, nor
shall any person under the age of 19 be permitted to conduct or assist in the conduct of any game
of bingo;

(b) No bingo license shall be issued to any nonprofit organization, unless such organization shall
have been in existence for at least 23 months prior to the issuance of the license;

(c)  Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization operating the bingo game.  If the premises is leased, the rate of rental shall not be
based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from bingo games;

(d) No nonprofit organization shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm, association,
or corporation said to have said individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on
behalf of the nonprofit organization, nor shall said nonprofit organization pay consulting fees to
any individual or entity for any services performed in relation to the operation and conduct of a
bingo game;

(e) A nonprofit organization shall not lend its name or allow its identity to be used by any other
person or entity in the operating or advertising of a bingo game in which said nonprofit
organization is not directly and solely operating said bingo game;

(f) (f) Prizes given by any nonprofit organization for the playing of bingo games in Jefferson
County shall not exceed the amounts set by local law;

(g) No person or organization, by whatever name or composition thereof, shall take any salary,
expense money, or fees as remuneration for services rendered in the operation of any bingo
game.
 
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 601 601.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***
AMENDMENT 601 RATIFIED 1996
Compensation of Judge of Probate of Barbour County.
(a) Effective October 1, 1997, the Judge of Probate of Barbour County shall receive
compensation in the form of an annual salary in the amount provided by general or local law,
which salary may be set from time to time by the Legislature. The salary paid in lieu of all other
fees, allowances, and percentages heretofore provided by law, shall be paid in equal monthly
installments out of the general fund in the county treasury.
(b) All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges collected for the use of the
Judge of Probate of Barbour County shall continue to be collected, but shall be paid into the
county general fund.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 602 602.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 602 RATIFIED 1996
Phase-out of Supernumerary Program for Certain Elected Public Officials in Coosa County;
Participation in Employees' Retirement System.
A mayor, sheriff, or elected or appointed Coosa County official shall not assume a
supernumerary office after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the
effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may
continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a
supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that
supernumerary program. Every mayor, sheriff, and elected or appointed Coosa County official
may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and
conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same retirement system.
Coosa County officials holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be
eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official
has served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a
supernumerary office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed
county official" shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or
appointed county official, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator, constable,
school board member, or any official elected from a judicial circuit.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 603 603.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 603 RATIFIED 1996
Commission Authorized to Levy Ad Valorem Tax for Fire Protection in Hale County.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Hale County Commission may levy on an
annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1996, an ad valorem tax on all
taxable property located in Hale County at a rate of two mills per dollar of assessed value of the
taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be paid into the county general fund and distributed
for the benefit of fire protection.
(b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay the
funds to the Hale County Fire Fighters Association. The county association shall divide the funds
equally among all eligible volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission at
each monthly meeting of the county association. The county commission and the county
association may jointly establish rules regarding the transfer, investing, accounting, and handling
of the funds.
(c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. All
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in Hale County
that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission and is a member in
good standing of the Hale County Association of Volunteer Fire Departments. The funds may not
be expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or fund-raising activities. After receiving
funds, the volunteer fire departments shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds were
properly expended. By September 15th of each year, each department and the Alabama Forestry
Commission shall file a form with the county association detailing the expenditures of all funds
during the previous 12 months and setting out a schedule of all proposed projects. The filing
shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. The
county association shall supply the accounting forms to each eligible volunteer fire department
and the Alabama Forestry Commission.
(d) The Alabama Forestry Commission's share of these funds collected shall be used in Hale
County only. The funds shall be used for buildings and purchase of equipment. The funds shall
not be expended for salaries.
(e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.
(f) The personnel of volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall not
be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of volunteer fire departments and the
Alabama Forestry Commission.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 604 604.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 604 RATIFIED 1996
Special Fire Protection Property Tax in Henry County.
The Legislature declares that the fire departments which receive funds pursuant to this
amendment are organizations which are public in nature, as they promote and protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county.
In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter provided by law, there shall be levied and collected
in Henry County a special property tax of two mills on each one dollar's worth of taxable
property as assessed for the state ad valorem taxation during the preceding year. The proceeds of
the additional taxes levied by this amendment shall be used exclusively for fire protection
services.
The Revenue Commissioner of Henry County shall assess the tax herein provided for, and shall
collect the tax in the same manner and method that other ad valorem taxes are collected. The
proceeds shall be divided by the revenue commissioner on an equal basis among the six eligible
volunteer fire departments in the county.
An eligible fire department, for purposes of this amendment, means a fire department in Henry
County which is a member in good standing with the Alabama Volunteer Fire Department
Association.
Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services including training, supplies, and equipment. The funds may also be expended to
purchase liability insurance to insure coverage of acts or omissions which are directly related to
the functions of a fire department which are committed by the department or the personnel of a
fire department. The funds may not be expended for food, drink, social activities, salaries, or
fund-raising activities. After receiving funds, the fire departments shall keep accurate records to
verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15 of each year, each volunteer fire
department shall file a financial statement with the Henry County Commission detailing the
expenditure of all funds received from this amendment during the previous 12 months. The filing
shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated.
Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department, any remaining funds derived
from this amendment or any assets purchased with funds derived from this amendment shall,
after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be divided equally among the remaining volunteer fire
departments in the county. In the event all of the volunteer fire departments are dissolved, the
additional property tax levied under this amendment shall self-destruct and no longer be levied
and collected.
The personnel of volunteer fire departments provided for in this amendment shall not be
considered employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of fire departments.
This amendment shall apply to collections of ad valorem taxes for the 1996-97 tax year and
thereafter. The initial provisions of this amendment may hereafter be amended by local
legislation which may become effective without referendum approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 605 605.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 605 RATIFIED 1996
Costs and Charges of Courts in Houston County.
The Legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, regulate, and alter the costs
and charges of courts in Houston County.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 606 606.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 606 RATIFIED 1996
Election of Board of Education of City of Bessemer.
The Legislature, by local act, may provide for the election of the members of the board of
education of the City of Bessemer in Jefferson County and may provide further for the operation
of the board.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 607 334.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 607 RATIFIED 1996
Amendment of Amendment No. 334.

Amendment No. 334
All vacancies in the office of judge of the circuit court and the office of judge of the district court
holding in Madison County shall be filled in the manner and for the time as herein provided.
The Madison County Judicial Commission is created for the purpose of nominating to the
Governor persons for appointment to such a vacancy. The commission shall be composed of nine
members. The members of the commission shall be two persons who are members of the
Alabama State Bar, one judge of the circuit court holding in Madison County, two members
appointed by Members of the Alabama House of Representatives who represent Madison
County, irrespective of whether such Members of the House of Representatives reside in
Madison County, two members appointed by Members of the Alabama Senate who represent
Madison County, irrespective of whether such Members of the Senate reside in Madison County,
and two members appointed jointly by these Members of the House of Representatives and
Members of the Senate.
All members of the commission shall reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court
holding in Madison County.
The two members of the commission who are required to be members of the Alabama State Bar
shall be elected by the members of such bar who are regularly licensed and qualified to practice
law in this state and who reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court holding in
Madison County. The Executive Committee of the Madison County Bar Association or its
successor body in such capacity, is authorized and directed to make rules, not inconsistent with
this amendment, for the election of such members of the commission as are required to be
members of the Alabama State Bar. The executive committee shall certify in writing to the Judge
of Probate of Madison County the names of the persons elected as members of the commission
by these members of the bar.
The Members of the Alabama House of Representatives who represent Madison County,
irrespective of whether these members reside in Madison County, shall make one initial
appointment of a member of the commission immediately upon the adoption of the amendment
adding this amendatory language and shall make the other initial appointment upon the first
expiration of the term of office of a member previously appointed pursuant to this amendment by
the Senators and Representatives in the Alabama Legislature residing in Madison County. These
Members of the Alabama House of Representatives representing Madison County shall make all
succeeding appointments to these two positions. These appointees shall not be members of the
Alabama State Bar.
The Members of the Alabama Senate representing Madison County, irrespective of whether these
members reside in Madison County, shall make one initial appointment of a member of the
commission immediately upon the adoption of the amendment adding this amendatory language
and shall make the other initial appointment upon the expiration of the term of office of the last
member previously appointed pursuant to this amendment by the Senators and Representatives of
the Alabama Legislature residing in Madison County. These Members of the Alabama Senate
representing Madison County shall make all succeeding appointments to these two positions.
These appointees shall not be members of the Alabama State Bar.
The Members of the House of Representatives and Senate representing Madison County,
irrespective of whether these members reside in Madison County, shall jointly make two initial
appointments upon the adoption of the amendment adding this amendatory language. These
Members of the House of Representatives and the Senate shall jointly make all succeeding
appointments to these two positions. These appointees shall not be members of the Alabama
State Bar.
These Members of the House of Representatives and Senate, respectively, shall certify in writing
to the Judge of Probate of Madison County the names of persons appointed by them to the
commission.
The judges of the circuit court holding in Madison County shall elect the member of the
commission who is required to be a judge of the circuit court. The judges of the circuit court
shall certify in writing to the judge of probate the name of the circuit judge elected by the circuit
judges as a member.
The terms of office of all members of the commission shall be six years. A vacancy in the office
of a member of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
member was originally chosen.
The Judge of Probate of Madison County shall record all such certificates of election and shall
safely and permanently keep the original certificates. Forthwith upon his or her receipt and
recordation of every certificate, the judge of probate shall send to the Governor a certified copy
of every certificate.
No member of the commission shall be eligible for nomination to the Governor for appointment
as judge of the circuit court or the district court during the term of office of the commission
member.
The members of the commission shall not receive any salary or other compensation for their
services as members. No member of the commission other than the member required to be a
judge of the circuit court shall hold any public office, and no member of the commission shall
hold any official position in any political party.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of judge of the circuit court or the office of judge of the district
court holding in Madison County, the commission shall nominate to the Governor three persons
having the qualifications for the office. The names of all persons considered for nomination shall
be available for review by the public and shall be deemed a public record. A nomination shall be
made only by the concurrence of at least five members of the commission, which vote shall be
conducted at a public meeting. The member of the commission elected by the judges of the
circuit court holding in Madison County shall only vote on matters before the commission in
instances when the vote by other commission members has resulted in a tie. The Governor shall
appoint to the office in which the vacancy exists one of the three persons so nominated for the
office. If the Governor fails to make an appointment from the list within 30 days from the date it
is presented to the Governor, the appointment shall be made by the Chief Justice or the acting
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court from the same list. The appointee shall hold such office until
the next general election for any state officer held at least six months after the vacancy occurs
and until a successor is elected and qualified. At the general election, the judicial office shall be
filled for a full term of office to commence on the first Monday after the second Tuesday in
January following the general election.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 608 608.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 608 RATIFIED 1996
Ratification of Levy and Collection of Certain Sales and Use Taxes in School District No. 1 in
Madison County.
Any provision of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, as amended, to the contrary
notwithstanding, all sales and use taxes for public school or education purposes imposed
pursuant to Act No. 82-525 in School District One in Madison County which have been
approved by a majority vote of the qualified electors of School District One in Madison County
prior to January 1, 1996, and the levy and collection thereof from the date of the initial levy
thereof, are hereby authorized, ratified, and confirmed regardless of any statutory or
constitutional defects, mistakes, errors, or ambiguities, including without limitation, with respect
to the authorization, adoption, or levy thereof or the election thereon, any failure to publish any
required notice, or any act of or failure to act by the Legislature with respect thereto; provided,
however, that the authorization, ratification, and confirmation effected by this amendment shall
not be applicable to any sales and use tax which is being challenged in appropriate judicial
proceedings in any proper court on the date the act proposing this amendment is adopted.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 609 609.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 609 RATIFIED 1996
Judge of Probate of Marengo County; Compensation, Fees, Etc.
(a) The Judge of Probate of Marengo County shall receive compensation in the form of an annual
salary which shall be equal to ninety percent of the annual salary compensation paid by the state
to the district court judge of the county. The salary shall be paid in lieu of all other fees,
allowances, and percentages heretofore provided by law and shall be paid in equal monthly
installments out of the general fund of the county treasury.
(b) All fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, and other charges heretofore collected for the
use of the Judge of Probate of Marengo County shall continue to be collected by the judge of
probate, but shall be paid into the county general fund.
(c) The County Commission of Marengo County shall provide the judge of probate with office
personnel, clerks and deputies, and with quarters, books, stationery, furniture, equipment, and
other supplies necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the office of the judge of probate.
Compensation of the personnel shall be fixed by the county commission and shall be paid in
equal monthly installments out of the general fund of Marengo County.
(d) This amendment shall be effective January 1 after its approval.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 610 610.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 610 RATIFIED 1996

Commission Authorized to Levy Ad Valorem Tax for Fire Protection in Marengo County.
(a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Marengo County Commission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1997, an ad valorem tax
on all taxable property located in Marengo County, excluding the city limits of Demopolis, at a
rate of two mills per dollar of assessed value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall
be paid into the county general fund and distributed for the benefit of fire protection.
(b) Within 90 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay the
funds to the Marengo County Association of Fire and Rescue Departments, Incorporated. The
county association shall divide the funds equally among all the eligible volunteer fire
departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission at each quarter meeting of the county
association. The county commission and the county association may jointly establish rules
regarding the transfer, investing, accounting, and handling of the funds.
(c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. An
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in Marengo
County that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission and is a
member in good standing of the Marengo County Association of Fire and Rescue Departments,
Incorporated. The funds may not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or fund-
raising activities. After receiving funds, the volunteer fire departments shall keep accurate
records to verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15th of each year, each
department and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall file a form with the county association
detailing the expenditures of all funds during the previous 12 months and setting out a schedule
of all proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the
unspent funds have been obligated. The county association shall supply the accounting forms to
each eligible volunteer fire department and the Alabama Forestry Commission.
(d) The Alabama Forestry Commission's share of these funds collected shall be used in Marengo
County only. The funds shall be used for buildings and purchase of equipment. The funds shall
not be expended for salaries.
(e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.
(f) The personnel of volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall not
be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of volunteer fire departments and the
Alabama Forestry Commission.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 611 611.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 611 RATIFIED 1996
Validation of Laws Regulating Court Costs in Randolph County.
All general laws, local laws, and population based laws previously enacted by the Legislature and
which are in effect on January 1, 1996, pertaining to or applicable to Randolph County which in
whole or in part regulate costs and charges of courts are hereby ratified, approved, validated, and
confirmed as of the date of their enactment. Any actions taken or payments made in accordance
with those laws are hereby ratified, approved, validated, and confirmed. This amendment shall
not be construed as prohibiting the Legislature from properly enacting a law to amend or repeal
those laws. The Legislature may, by local law, increase or decrease costs and charges of courts.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 612 612.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 612 RATIFIED 1996
Bingo Games in Russell County.
(a) The operation of bingo games for prizes or money by certain nonprofit organizations and
certain private clubs for charitable, educational, or other lawful purposes shall be legal in Russell
County, subject to any resolution or ordinance by the county commission as provided by law
regulating the operation of bingo. The county commission may promulgate rules and regulations
for issuing permits or licenses and for operating bingo games within the jurisdiction of the
county. The county commission shall insure compliance pursuant to any ordinance and the
following:
(1) No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to play any game or games of bingo, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person under the age of 19 shall be permitted to
conduct or assist in the conduct of any game of bingo.
(2) Except for special permit holders, no bingo permit or license shall be issued to any nonprofit
organization or qualified private club, unless the organization or club shall have been in
existence for at least five years and owned real property in the county for five years immediately
prior to issuing the permit or license, except the following:
(3) Bingo games shall be operated only on the premises owned or leased by the nonprofit
organization or club operating the bingo game. If the premises are leased, the rate or rental shall
not be based on a percentage of receipts or profits resulting from operating the bingo games.
(4) No nonprofit organization or club shall enter into any contract with any individual, firm,
association, or corporation to have the individual or entity operate bingo games or concessions on
behalf of the nonprofit organization or club. No nonprofit organization or club may pay
consulting fees, any compensation or salary to any individual or entity for any services performed
relating to operating or conducting any bingo game.
(5) A nonprofit organization or club shall not lend its name or allow any other person or entity to
use its identity in operating or advertising a bingo game in which the nonprofit organization or
club is not directly and solely operating the bingo game or concessions.
(6) Prizes given by any qualified nonprofit organization or qualified private club for playing
bingo games shall not exceed the cash amount or gifts of equivalent value, set by the Legislature,
during any bingo session. The Legislature shall set a maximum amount for any calendar week.
(7) One hundred percent of the net revenues derived from operating bingo games shall be
designated and expended for charitable or educational purposes.
(8) No person, or organization or club, by whatever name or composition, shall take any
expenses for operating a bingo game except as permitted by law.
(b) The Legislature may, by local legislation, provide for the implementation of this amendment,
including, but not limited to, the imposition of criminal penalties for violations of this
amendment or the local legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 613 613.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 613 RATIFIED 1996
Costs and Charges of Courts in St. Clair County; Distribution of Additional Revenue.
The Legislature may, from time to time, by general, special, or local law, regulate and alter the
costs and charges of court in St. Clair County and provide for the distribution of any additional
revenue for the purpose of establishing, operating, and maintaining the juvenile court system and
juvenile programs in the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 614 614.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 614 RATIFIED 1996
Fire Protection Districts in Talladega County.
The Legislature may, by local law, from time to time, provide for the establishment of districts in
Talladega County for fire protection and provide for mandatory annual dues in the districts. The
Legislature shall provide for the operation of the districts and for the collection and disposition of
the mandatory annual dues. The Legislature may limit the liability of the county for the operation
of a district and provide that a district shall be exempt from all taxation. The districts may
include incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county which need and are willing to
subscribe to the fire protection services.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 615 615.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1996 ***

AMENDMENT 615 RATIFIED 1996
Procedure for Filling Vacancies in Office of Judge of Circuit Court, Judge of District Court, and
District Attorney in Talladega County.
In Talladega County, all vacancies in the offices of judge of the circuit court, judge of the district
court, and district attorney shall be filled in the manner and for the time as provided in this
amendment.
The Talladega County Judicial Commission is created for the purpose of nominating to the
Governor persons for appointment to any vacancy in the offices of judge of the circuit court,
judge of the district court, and district attorney. The five members of the commission shall
consist of the following: The presiding judge of the Circuit Court of Talladega County, as a
nonvoting ex officio member who may only vote in the event of a tie vote among the other four
members of the commission, and who shall preside over all meetings of the commission; the
commissioner of the Alabama State Board of Bar Commissioners representing Talladega County,
as an ex officio voting member; and three residents of Talladega County who are not members of
the Alabama State Bar. Appointed members shall serve for terms of four years. A vacancy in the
office of a member of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner
as the member was originally chosen. The term of office for the initial appointed members of the
commission shall begin immediately upon appointment.
The nonlawyer members of the commission shall be appointed by mutual consent of the
members of the state Legislature who represent Talladega County. The nonlawyer members of
the commission shall not be eligible to serve two successive terms.
The presiding judge of the Circuit Court of Talladega County shall certify in writing to the Judge
of Probate of Talladega County his or her own name and the name of the Alabama State Bar
Commissioner representing Talladega County, as ex officio members. The appropriate members
of the state Legislature representing Talladega County shall certify in writing to the Judge of
Probate of Talladega County the names of the three resident members appointed to the
commission.
The Judge of Probate of Talladega County shall record all certificates of election and shall safely
and permanently keep the original and all subsequent certificates of election. Immediately upon
receipt and recordation of a certificate of election, the judge of probate shall send a certified copy
to the Governor.
No member of the commission shall seek appointment as a judge of the circuit court, judge of the
district court, or district attorney during the term of office for which the member has been
selected.
The members of the commission shall not receive any salary or other compensation for their
service as members. No appointed member of the commission shall hold any public office. No
member of the commission shall hold any official position in any political party.
If, after the ratification of this amendment, a vacancy occurs in Talladega County in the offices of
judge of the circuit court, judge of the district court, or district attorney, the presiding judge of the
Circuit Court of Talladega County shall call a meeting of the commission to fill the vacancy. The
commission shall nominate three persons having the qualifications for the vacant office. The
nominations shall be made only by the concurrence of a majority of the members of the
commission. The presiding judge of the circuit court shall certify the three nominees to the
Governor, who shall appoint one to the office in which the vacancy exists. If the Governor fails
to make an appointment from the submitted list within 30 days from the date of submission, the
appointment shall be made from the list by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Alabama. If
the appointment is for a judicial vacancy, the appointee shall hold office for an initial term lasting
until the first Monday after the second Tuesday in January following the next general election
held after completing one year in office. At the election, the judicial office shall be filled for a
full term of office beginning at the end of the appointed term. If the appointment is for the office
of district attorney, the appointee shall hold office for the term or the remainder of the unexpired
term as provided by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 616 616.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 616

APPROPRIATION OF CELLULAR RADIO TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE TAX
FUNDS FOR PAYMENT ON OUTSTANDING BONDS OF ALABAMA REVOLVING
LOAN FUND AUTHORITY.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Legislature may appropriate the revenue and
other funds received or collected pursuant to any cellular radio telecommunication service tax to
pay the principal at maturity and any interest due on the outstanding bonds issued by the
Alabama Revolving Loan Fund Authority or its successor authority.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 617 617.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 617

INDEBTEDNESS BY STATE FOR STATE PARM SYSTEM AND HISTORICAL SITES.

     The State of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for the purpose of the acquisition,
provision, construction, improvement, renovation, equipping, and maintenance of the state parks
system, public historical sites, and public historical parks, and in evidence of the indebtedness so
incurred to sell and issue bonds, in addition to all other bonds of the state, not exceeding one
hundred ten million dollars ($110,000,000) in aggregate principal amount. The bonds shall be
direct general obligations of the state and the full faith and credit and taxing power of the state
are hereby pledged to the prompt and faithful payment of the principal thereof and the interest
thereon. One hundred four million dollars ($104,000,000) of the bonds shall be issued for the
state by the Alabama State Parks System Improvement Corporation pursuant to the appropriate
resolutions adopted by the board of directors of the corporation and the proceeds thereof shall be
appropriated and used exclusively for the purpose of paying the expenses incurred in the sale and
issuance of the bonds and for payment of the costs of the acquisition, provision, construction,
improvement, renovation, equipping, and maintenance of the state parks system; provided, any
lake acquired and/or built with the proceeds thereof by the Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources as a part of a state park must have a minimum buffer of six hundred (600)
lateral feet between the shoreline and any private property. In the event that the water from any
said lake is sold, the cost thereof shall be equal to the periodic costs for that portion of the bond
issue incurred by the Alabama State Parks System Improvement Corporation for said lake, and
shall be repaid to the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources at the same rate as the
debt service on said bond issue. Such acquisition, provision, construction, improvement,
renovation, equipping and maintenance of the state parks system, shall be completed at the
direction of the Alabama State Parks System Improvement Corporation with the advice and
concurrence of the Joint Legislative Committee on State Parks, and all state park system land and
facilities, except for existing concession operations or other existing permitted operations, shall
thereafter be exclusively and solely operated and maintained by the Department of Conservation
and Natural Resources. Six million dollars ($6,000,000) of the bonds shall be issued for the date
by the Alabama Public Historical Sites and Parks Improvement Corporation Pursuant to the
appropriate resolutions adopted by the board of directors Of the corporation and the proceeds
thereof shall be appropriated and used exclusively for the purpose of paying the expenses
incurred in the sale and issuance of the bonds and for the payment of the costs of the acquisition,
maintenance of public historical sites and public histoncal parks shall be completed at the
direction of the Alabama Public Historical Sites and Parks Improvement Corporation and shall
thereafter be operated by the Alabama Historical Commission, or other entity as authorized by
the commission, with the advice and concurrence of the Joint Legislative Committee on State
Parks.

     The State of Alabama is further authorized to become indebted and in evidence thereof to sell
and issue one or more series of bonds to refund all or any of the bonds hereinabove authorized by
this amendment in such principal amount or amounts, which may exceed the principal amount of
the bonds being refunded, and in such manner as may be provided by law duly enacted by the
Legislature.

     The aforesaid corporations are hereby vested with the power and authority to provide for the
sale and terms of the bonds hereby authorized and the issuance thereof, subject to the approval of
the Governor. The bonds may be sold, executed, and delivered at any time and from time to time,
may be in such forms, denominations, series, and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities,
may bear such date or dates, may be payable in such installments and at such place or places,
may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may contain
provisions for redemption at the option of the state to be exercised by the corporations at such
date or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as
shall be provided by the corporations in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds
hereby authorized are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature on such date and
in such amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the board of directors of
the corporations under which they are issued, the last of which installments shall mature not later
than 20 years after the date of the bonds of the same series. All of the bonds, including refunding
bonds, shall. be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public auction, after
such advertisement as may be prescribed by the corporations, to the bidder whose bid reflects the
lowest true interest cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the bonds sold;
provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the corporation is received, all bids may be
rejected.   The bonds shall be signed in the name of the state by the Governor of the State of
Alabama and the Great Seal of the State of Alabama or a facsimile thereof shall be impressed,
printed or otherwise reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature of the Secretary of
State of the State of Alabama; provided that facsimile signatures of either or both of the officers
may be reproduced on such bonds in lieu of their manually signing the same.
 
    All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from all taxation in the state, except inheritance, estate and gift
taxes.
 
    The proceeds from the sale of the bonds by the Alabama State Parks System Improvement
Corporation hereby authorized, other than refunding bonds, after the payment of all expenses of
the sale thereof, shall be set apart in a special fund in the State Treasury to be designated "The
Alabama State Parks System Improvement Fund," and such proceeds, together with income
derived from the investment and reinvestment thereof, shall be temporarily invested until needed
and disbursed, on order of the aforesaid corporation solely for the purposes, hereinabove
described, for which the bonds are authorized to be issued.
 
    The proceeds from the sale of the bonds by the Alabama Public Historical Sites and Parks
Improvement Corporation hereby authorized, other than refunding bonds, after the payment of all
expenses of the sale thereof, shall be set apart in a special fund in the State Treasury to be
designated "The Alabama Public Historical Sites and Parks Improvement Fund," and such
proceeds, together with income derived from the investment and reinvestment thereof, shall be
temporarily invested until needed and disbursed, on order of the aforesaid corporation solely for
the purposes, hereinabove described, for which the bonds are authorized to be issued.

     No further authorization from the Legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any
bonds issued hereunder. However, the Legislature shall enact appropriate legislation
implementing the provisions hereof, including provisions for the issuance of refunding bonds as
hereinabove authorized.

    The Alabama State Parks System Improvement Corporation and the Alabama Public Historical
Sites and Parks Improvement Corporation authorized in this constitutional amendment are
strongly encouraged to utilize businesses and companies in all aspects of the bond and
construction portions of this amendment that reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the state.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 618 618.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 618

INDEBTEDNESS BY STATE FOR ANIMAL AND LIVESTOCK DIAGNOSTIC
SERVICES AND EDUCATION FACILITIES.

    The State of Alabama, is authorized to become indebted for the purpose of Providing,
equipping and improving facilities for the provision of animal and livestock diagnostic services
and for use as educational, research and promotional facilities in the fields of agriculture, forestry
and veterinary medicine, and in evidence of the indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue bonds,
in addition to all other bonds of the State, not exceeding $52,000,000 in aggregate principal
amount. Said bonds shall be direct general obligations of the State and the full faith and credit
and taxing power of the State are hereby pledged to- the prompt and faithful payment of the
principal thereof and  the interest thereon. The proceeds from the sale of said bonds are hereby
appropriated and shall be used exclusively for the purpose of paying the expenses incurred in the
sale and issuance thereof and for payment of the costs of the construction, alteration,
improvement, remodeling, renovation, modernization, enlargement and equipment of buildings
and related facilities, not including the purchase of sites thereof, for use (1) as animal diagnostic
laboratories in order to provide improved animal health testing for livestock and poultry
producers, veterinarians, animal owners and animal-related businesses generally, (2) in carrying
out agricultural and forestry research and for agriculture and forestry, plant science and nursery
crop education at post-secondary levels, (3) in the provision of instruction and research in the
field of veterinary medicine and (4) in providing agricultural extension services at regional
research extension centers. Said bonds shall be issued by the State pursuant to appropriate
resolutions adopted by the board of directors of Alabama Agricultural Development Authority,
and the proceeds thereof shall be allocated by said Authority for payment of the aforesaid costs in
such amounts and manner as shall be authorized by act of the legislature. Such buildings and
facilities and improvements thereto shall be constructed at the direction of said Authority and
shall thereafter be operated by or in cooperation with the State's Morill Act land grant
universities and those institutions eligible to receive federal appropriations in support of
agriculture and forestry extension and research and for the acquisition and improvement or
agricultural and food sciences facilities and equipment and such other agencies and institutions as
the said Authority shall determine to be appropriate and convenient therefor.

     The State of Alabama is further authorized to become indebted and in evidence thereof to sell
and issue one or more series of bonds to refund all or any of the bonds hereinabove authorized by
this amendment in such principal amount or amounts (which may exceed the principal amount of
the bonds being refunded) and in such manner as may be provided by law duly enacted by the
legislature.

     The aforesaid Authority is hereby vested with the power and authority to provide for the sale
and terms of the bonds hereby authorized and the issuance thereof, subject to the approval of the
Governor. The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time,
may be in such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities,
may bear such date or dates, may be payable in such installments and at such place or places,
may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may contain
provisions for redemption at the option of the State to be exercised by said Authority at such date
or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as shall
be provided by the said Authority in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds hereby
authorized are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature on such date in such
amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the board of directors of the said
Authority under which they are issued, the last of which installments shall mature not later than
twenty-one years after the date of the bonds of the same series. All of the bonds (including
refunding bonds) shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public
auction, after such advertisement as may be prescribed by the said Authority, to the bidder whose
bid reflects the lowest true interest cost to the State computed to the respective maturities of the
bonds sold; provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the said Authority is received all bids
may be rejected.
 
    The bonds shall be signed in the name of the State by the Governor and countersigned by the
chairman of the Said Authority and the Great Seal of the State of Alabama or a facsimile thereof
shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature
of the Secretary of State; provided that facsimile signatures of any or all of said officers may be
reproduced on such bonds in, lieu of their manually signing the

   All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from all taxation in the gtate, except inheritance, estate and gift
taxes.
The proceeds from the sale of those bonds hereby authorized (other than refunding bonds), after
the payment of all expenses of the sale thereof, shall be set apart in a special fund in the state
Treasury to be designated "The Alabama Agricultural, Forestry and Veterinary Medicine
Facilities Improvement Fund," and such proceeds shall be temporarily invested until needed and
disbursed, together with income derived from the investment and reinvestment thereof, on order
of the aforesaid Authority solely for the purposes, hereinabove described, for which said bonds
are authorized to be issued. Proceeds and said income so disbursed may be combined with monies
derived from other sources or otherwise provided by State institutions in accomplishing said
purposes in such manner as said Authority shall direct, but the provision or existence of matching
funds from the federal government or other entities or persons shall not be a prerequisite to the
issuance of any bonds hereunder or to the disbursement of any proceeds thereof or any income
earned on such proceeds.
No further authorizations from the legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any bonds
issued hereunder. However, the legislature shall enact appropriate legislation implementing the
provisions hereof, including provisions for the issuance of refunding bonds as hereinabove
authorized.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 619 619.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 619

INDEBTEDNESS BY STATE FOR TEXTILE TECHNOLOGY AND EDUCATION
FACILITIES.

     The State of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for the purpose of providing,
equipping, and improving facilities for the purpose of providing and equipping a center for
cotton, cotton products technology, and for its use as an educational, applied research, and
promotional facility in the field of textile and apparel technology, and in evidence of the
indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue bonds, in addition to all other bonds of the state, not
exceeding five
million seven hundred thousand dollars ($5,700,000) in aggregate principal amount. Said bonds
shall be direct general obligations of the state and the full faith and credit and taxing power of the
state are hereby pledged to the prompt and faithful payment of the principal thereof and the
interest thereon. The proceeds from the sale of said bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be
used exclusively for the purpose of paying the expenses incurred in the sale and issuance thereof
and for payment of the costs of the construction, alteration, improvement, remodeling,
renovation, modernization, enlargement, and equipment of buildings and related facilities,
including parking areas and ramps, roadways, sewers, curbs, and gutters, but not for the purchase
of sites for providing and equipping a center for cotton, cotton products technology, and for its
use as an educational, applied research, and promotional facility in the field of textile and apparel
technology. Said bonds shall be issued by the state pursuant to appropriate resolutions adopted by
the Board of Directors of the Alabama Agricultural Development Authority, and the proceeds
thereof shall be allocated by said authority for payment of the aforesaid costs in such amounts
and manner as shall be authorized by an act of the Legislature. Such buildings and facilities and
improvements thereto shall be constructed at the direction of said authority and shall thereafter
be operated by an agency to be determined by the Alabama Commissioner of Agriculture and
Industries in consultation and cooperation with textile and apparel-related businesses and trade
associations to include, but not be limited to, the Alabama Textile Manufacturers Association,
Inc., under such arrangements as may be authorized by law.

     The State of Alabama is further authorized to become indebted and in evidence thereof to sell
and issue one or more series of bonds to refund all or any of the bonds hereinabove authorized by
this amendment in such principal amount or amounts (which may exceed the principal amount of
the bonds being refunded) and in such manner as may be provided by law duly enacted by the
Legislature.

     The aforesaid authority is hereby vested with the power and authority to provide for the sale
and terms of the bonds hereby authorized and the issuance thereof, subject to the approval of the
Governor. The bonds may be sold, executed, and delivered at any time and from time to time,
may be in such forms, denominations, series, and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities,
may bear such date or dates, may be payable in such installments and at such place or places,
may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may contain
provisions for redemption at the option of the state to be exercised by said authority at such date
or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as shall
be provided by the said authority in the resolution or resolutions  whereunder the bonds hereby
authorized are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature on such date in such
amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the board of directors of the said
authority under which they are issued, the last of which installments Shall mature not later than
twenty-one years after the date of the bonds of the same series.  All of the bonds (including
refunding bonds) shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public
auction, after such advertisement as may be prescribed by the said authority, to the bidder whose
bid reflects the lowest true interest cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the
bonds sold; provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the said authority is received, all bids
may be rejected.

     The bonds shall be signed in the name of the state by the Governor and countersigned by the
chairman of the said authority and the Great Seal of the State of Alabama or a facsimile thereof
shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature
of the Secretary of State; provided that facsimile signatures of any or all of said officers may be
reproduced on such bonds in lieu of their manually signing the same.

     All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from all taxation in the state, except inheritance, estate and gift
taxes.

     The proceeds from the sale of those bonds hereby authorized (other than refunding bonds),
after the payment of all expenses of the sale thereof, shall be set apart in a special fund in the
State Treasury to be designated "The Alabama Textile Technology Facilities Improvement
Fund," and such proceeds shall be temporarily invested until needed and disbursed, together with
income derived from the investment and reinvestment thereof, on order of the doresaid authority
solely for the purposes, hereinabove described, for which said.bonds are authorized to be issued.
Proceeds and said income so disbursed may be combined with moneys derived from other
sources or otherwise prdvided by state institutions in accomplishing said purposes in such
manner as said authority shall direct, but the provision or existence of matching funds from the
federal government or other entities or persons shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of any
bonds hereunder or to the disbursements of any proceeds thereof or any income earned on such
proceeds.

     No further authorization from the Legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any
bonds issued hereunder. However, the Legislature shall enact appropriate legislation
implementing the provisions hereof, including provisions for the issuance of refunding bonds as
hereinabove authorized.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 620 620.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 620

INDEBTEDNESS BY STATE FOR FORENSIC SCIENCES LABORATORIES AND
EDUCATION FACILITIES.

     The State of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for the purpose of providing,
equipping and improving facilities in the State for use as forensic laboratories and education
facilities for the provision of instruction and research in the field of forensic sciences and in
evidence of the indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue bonds, in addition to all other bonds of
the State not exceeding $17,500,000 in aggregate principal amount. Said bonds shall be direct
general obligations of the State and the full faith and credit and taxing power of the State are
hereby pledged to the prompt and faithful payment of the principal thereof and the interest
thereon. The proceeds from the sale of said bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used
exclusively for the purpose of paying the expenses incurred in the sale and issuance thereof and
for payment of the costs of the construction, alteration, improvement, remodeling, renovation,
modernization, enlargement and equipment of buildings and related facilities, including parking
areas and ramps, roadways, sewers, curbs, and gutters, including the purchase of sites therefor,
for use as forensic sciences laboratories and educational facilities for the provision of instruction
and research in the field of forensic sciences. None of the proceeds derived from the sale of the
bonds may be used to pay rents for the use of real or personal property or to make payments
under any lease with option to purchase or similar contractual arrangement. Said bonds shall be
issued by the State pursuant to appropriate resolutions adopted by the board of directors of
Alabama Forensic Sciences Bond Authority, and the proceeds thereof shall be allocated by said
authority for payment of the aforesaid costs in such amounts and manner as shall be authorized
by act of the legislature

     The State of Alabama is further authorized to become indebted and in evidence thereof to sell
and issue one or more series of bonds to refund all or any of the bonds hereinabove authorized by
this amendment in such principal amount or amounts (which may exceed the principal amount of
the bonds being refunded) and in such manner as may be provided by law duly enacted by the
legislature.
 
   The aforesaid Authority is hereby vested with the power and authority to provide for the sale
and terms of the bonds hereby authorized and the issuance thereof, subject to the approval of the
Governor. The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time,
may be in such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities,
may bear such date or dates, may be payable in such installments and at such place or places,
may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may contain
provisions for redemption at the option of the State to be exercised by said Authority at such date
or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices all as shall
be provided by the said Authority in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds hereby
authorized are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature on such date in such
amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the board of directors of the said
Authority under which they are issued, the last of which installments shall mature not later than
twenty-one years after the date of the bonds of the same series. All of the bonds (including
refunding bonds) shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public
auction after such advertisement as may be prescribed by the said Authority, to the bidder whose
bid reflects the lowest true interest cost to the State computed to the respective maturities of the
bonds sold; provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the said Authority is received all bids
may be rejected.

     The bonds shall be signed in the name of the State by the Governor and countersigned by the
chairman of the said Authority and the Great Seal of the State of Alabama or a facsimile thereof
shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature
of the Secretary of State; provided that facsimile signatures of any or all of said officers may be
reproduced on such bonds in lieu of their manually signing the
same.

     All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from all taxation in the State, except inheritance, estate and gift
taxes.

     The proceeds from the sale of those bonds hereby authorized (other than refunding bonds),
after the payment of all expenses of the sale thereof, shall be set apart in a special fund in the
state Treasury to be designated "The Forensic Sciences Facilities Improvement Fund," and such
proceeds shall be temporarily invested until needed and disbursed, together with income derived
from the investment and reinvestment thereof, on order of the aforesaid Authority solely for the
purposes, hereinabove described, for which said bonds are authorized to be issued. Proceeds and
said income so disbursed may be combined with monies derived from other sources or otherwise
provided by State institutions in accomplishing said purposes in such manner as said Authority
shall direct, but the provision or existence of matching funds from the federal government or
other entities or persons shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of any bonds hereunder or to
the disbursement of any proceeds thereof or any income earned on such proceeds.

     The Alabama Forensic Sciences Bond Authority shall, to the extent possible and practical,
utilize businesses and companies in all aspects of the bond and construction portions of this
amendment that reflect the racial and ethnic diversity of the state.

     No further authorizations from the legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any
bonds issued hereunder. However, the legislature shall enact appropriate legislation
implementing the provisions hereof, including provisions for the issuance of refunding bonds as
hereinabove authorized.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 621 621.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 621

EFFECTIVENESS OF UNFUNDED MANDATES FOR MUNICIPALITIES, ETC.

     (a) No general law, or state executive order whose purpose or effect is to require a new or
increased expenditure of funds held or disbursed by the governing body of a municipality or
county, or an instrumentality thereof, shall become effective as to any municipality or county, or
an instrumentality

thereof until approved by an ordinance enacted, or a resolution adopted, by the governing
authority of the affected municipality, county, or instrumentality or until, and only as long as, the
Legislature appropriates funds for the purpose to the affected municipality, county, or
instrumentality and only to the extent and amount that the funds are provided, or until a law
provides for a local source of revenue within the municipality, county, or instrumentality for the
stated purpose and the affected municipality, county, or instrumentality is authorized by
ordinance or resolution to levy and collect the revenue and only to the extent and amount of the
revenue.

     (b) This amendment shall not apply to:

          (1) A local law as defined in Article IV, Section 110, Constitution of Alabama 1901.
          (2) An act, state executive order requiring expenditures by a school board.
          (3) An act defining a new crime or amending the definition of an existing crime.
          (4) An act, statute, executive order enacted, promulgated, or adopted and effective prior to
the ratification of this amendment which by its provisions requires expenditures by the county or
municipality at any time after the effective date of this amendment.
          (5) An act enacted, or state executive order promulgated or adopted to comply with a
federal mandate, only to the extent of the federal mandate.
          (6) An act adopted or enacted by two-thirds of those voting in each house of the
Legislature and any rule or regulation adopted to implement that act or adopted pursuant thereto.
          (7) An act determined by the Legislative Fiscal Office to have an aggregate insignificant
fiscal impact on affected municipalities, counties, or instrumentalities. For purposes of this
subsection, the phrase "aggregate insignificant fiscal impact" shall mean any impact less than
$50,000 annually.
          (8) An act of general application prescribing the minimum compensation for public
officials.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 622 622.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 622

ALABAMA RELIGIOUS FREEDOM AMENDMENT.

     SECTION I. The amendment shall be known as and may be cited as the Alabama Religious
Freedom Amendment.

     SECTION II. The Legislature makes the following findings concerning religious freedom:
          (1) The framers of the United States Constitution, recognizing free exercise of religion as
an unalienable right, secured its protection in the First Amendment to the Constitution, and the
framers of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, also recognizing this right, secured the
protection of religious freedom in Article I, Section 3. 
          (2) Federal and state laws "neutral" toward religion may burden religious exercise as surely
as laws intended to interfere with religious exercise.
          (3) Governments should not burden religious exercise without compelling justification.
          (4) In Employment Division v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990), the United States Supreme
Court virtually eliminated the requirement that the government justify burdens on religious
exercise imposed by laws neutral toward religion.
          (5) The compelling interest test as set forth in prior court rulings is a workable test for
striking sensible balances between religious liberty and competing governmental interests in
areas ranging from public education (pedagogical interests and religious rights, including
recognizing regulations necessary to alleviate interference with the educational process versus
rights of religious freedom) to national defense (conscription and conscientious objection,
including the need to raise an army versus rights to object to individual participation), and other
areas of important mutual concern.
          (6) Congress passed the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, 42 U.S.C.,  2000bb, to
establish the compelling interest test set forth in prior federal court rulings, but in City of Boerne
v. Flores, 117 S.Ct. 2157 (1997), the United States Supreme Court held the act unconstitutional
stating that the right to regulate was retained by the states.

     SECTION III. The purpose of the Alabama Religious Freedom Amendment is to guarantee
that the freedom of religion is not burdened by state and local law; and to provide a claim or
defense to persons whose religious freedom is burdened by government.

     SECTION IV. As used in this amendment, the following words shall have the following
meanings:

          (1) DEMONSTRATES. Meets the burdens of going forward with the evidence and of
persuasion.
          (2) FREEDOM OF RELIGION. The free exercise of religion under Article I, Section 3, of
the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
          (3) GOVERNMENT. Any branch, department, agency, instrumentality, and official (or
other person acting under the color of, law) Of the State of Alabama, any political subdivision of
a state, municipality, or other local government.
          (4) RULE. Any government statute, regulation, ordinance, administrative provision, ruling
guideline, requirement, or any statement of law whatever.

     SECTION V.      (a) Government shall not burden a person's freedom of religion even if the
burden results from a rule of general applicability, except as provided in subsection (b).

     (b) Government may burden a person's freedom of religion only if it demonstrates that
application of the burden to the person:

          (1) Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
          (2) Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.

     (c) A person whose' religious freedom has been burdened in violation of this section may
assert that violation as a claim or defense in a judicial, administrative, or other proceeding and
obtain appropriate relief against a government.

     SECTION VI. (a) This amendment applies to all government rules and implementations
thereof, whether statutory or otherwise, and whether adopted before or after the effective date of
this amendment.

     (b) Nothing in this amendment shall be construed to authorize any government to burden any
religious belief.

     (c) Nothing in this amendment shall be construed to affect, interpret, or in any way address
those portions of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution permitting the free
exercise of religion or prohibiting laws respecting the establishment of religion, or those
provisions of Article I, Section 3, of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, regarding the
establishment of religion.

     SECTION VII. (a) This amendment shall be liberally construed to effectuate its remedial and
deterrent purposes.

     (b) If any provision of this amendment or its application to any particular person or
circumstance is held invalid, that provision or its application is severable and does not affect the
validity of other provisions or applications of this amendment.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 623 623.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 623

TRUST FUNDS FOR CONTINUING BENEFIT OF CERTAIN CITIES.

     Part I. As used in this amendment, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     (a) Authorized city. Any city in which the voters have authorized the establishment of one or
more trust funds in the manner provided in this amendment, notwithstanding Section 94 of this
Constitution.
     (b) Authorized investment. Any investment authorized by law for the investment of any of the
trust funds of either the Teachers' Retirement Systein of Alabama or the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama.
     (c) Authorizing ordinance. An ordinance of an authorized city adopted in accordance with this
amendment.
     (d) City. Any city with a population of 150,000 or more according to the latest federal
decennial census.
     (e) Governing body. The city council, city commission, or other legislative body authorized
under general law to adopt ordinances for the operation and governance of a city.
     (f) Investment policy. A written statement setting forth the mode and manner for investing the
assets of a trust fund in authorized investments, establishing benchmarks and criteria for
measuring investment performance and compliance with the investment policy, and specifying a
requirement for the preparation and publication of periodic reports on investment performance
and investment policy compliance.
     (g) Trust fund. A fund established pursuant to this amendment.

     Part II. The governing body of any authorized city may establish by ordinance one or more
trust funds for the continuing benefit of the authorized city and its citizens which shall be funded
and administered in accordance with the ordinance and this amendment.

     Part III. The authorizing ordinance shall include the following provisions:

     (a) The amount and source of funds to be initially set aside in the trust fund.
     (b) The conditions of expenditure of the principal of or earnings on the assets of the trust
fund, or any other conditions, which conditions may include a request by the mayor, approval by
any specified number of members of the governing body of the authorized city greater than a
simple majority of the members, or any other conditions.
     (c) An investment policy for the trust fund.
     (d) Provision for the custody of the assets of the trust fund by the finance director of the
authorized city, or a bank, savings association or trust company with a place of business in
Alabama, which is organized and existing under the laws of this state, any other state of the
United States, or the United States and which is authorized pursuant to the laws of this state or
the United States, to conduct, and is conducting in this state, the business of a trust company, or
with respect to a bank or savings association, the business of making loans and taking deposits,
selected in a manner specified in the authorizing ordinance.
(e) Any other provisions, not inconsistent with this amendment, as may be deemed appropriate
by the governing body.
Part IV. An authorizing ordinance once adopted may be subsequently amended only as proposed
in an ordinance adopted by the governing body, approved by the mayor, and approved by a
majority of the qualified electors of an authorized city voting at an election called for such
purpose. Approval by a majority of the qualified electors shall not be required for an amendment
to an authorizing ordinance for the sole purpose of providing for the deposit of additional funds
or authorized investments into a previously established trust fund. An authorized city may call and
pay the expenses of elections for the purpose of considering amendments to an authorizing
ordinance.

    Part V. In the event this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of a
city who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted to
them for approval, the governing body may establish one or more trust funds as provided in this
amendment. In the event this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of a
city who vote thereon vote against the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted to them
for approval, the authority to establish one or more trust funds as provided herein shall not be
given unless the question of authority to establish trust funds is again submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of a city and voted in the affirmative by a majority of those voting at the
election. Each such election shall be ordered, held, canvassed, and may be contested in the same
manner as is provided by law applicable to the city for elections to authorize the issuance of
municipal bonds. In the event the authority to establish trust funds is defeated, subsequent
elections for the approval of the authority may be held again, but no election shall be held within
one year of any previous election. Once authority to establish trust funds has been approved, no
further election shall be required thereon.

     Part VI. The authority and powers conferred by this amendment are intended to be in addition
to, and not in derogation of, authority and powers otherwise provided by law.

     Part VII. This amendment is intended to supersede any conflicting constitutional provisions or
statutes. Notwithstanding the fore' going, the Legislature may enact laws supplemental to this
amendment and in furtherance of the purposes and objectives thereof, provided that those laws
are not inconsistent with the express provisions of this amendment.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 624 624.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 624

PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN MARENGO
COUNTY.

     For the promotion of local economic and industrial development of Marengo County,
Marengo County and each municipality having its corporate limits located wholly in the county,
other provisions of law or this constitution notwithstanding, shall have, independently or in
cooperation with one or more of such governmental entities, without an election, full and
continuing power to do all of the following:

     (1) To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings,
factories, works, facilities, machinery, and equipment of any kind.

     (2) To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey anY such property
described in subdivision (1) above, to any person, firra, association, or corporation.

     (3) To promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of
new industries or businesses therein.

     (4) To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to any
individual, firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

     (5) To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease, or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision (1) or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may be issued upon the full faith and credit of the
county or any such municipality or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

     (6) To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by
such board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of the county
or any such municipality may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the
office of the Judge of Probate or the Secretary of State, or their respective successors in function,
and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all
powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon the county or any such municipality. .
     The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness
that they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be
used in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized shall be conclusive, and no
purchaser or holder thereof need inquire further. The bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations
or evidences or indebtedness issued hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of the
county or any such municipality for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the
county or any such municipality under Section 224 or Section 225 of the Constitution of
Alabama of 1901.  
   In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither the county' nor any such municipality
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 94 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901. This
amendment shall be self-executing, but notwithstanding any contrary provisions of Section 104
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, the Legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special, or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth. No such special or local act shall be subject to
the provisions of Section 106 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.
 
     Any actions authorized in this Amendment to be taken by the county or any such municipality
which have been taken subsequent to January 1, 1998, are hereby ratified, approved, and
confirmed.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 625 625.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 625

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN BIBB COUNTY; PARTICIPATION
IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No person elected or appointed Sheriff of Bibb County, or any elected or appointed Bibb
County official, may assume a supernumerary office after the effective date of this amendment.
Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in a
supernumerary program may continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which shall
include the assumption of a supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of the
law which established that supernumerary program. Every sheriff and other elected or appointed
Bibb County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the
same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same
retirement system. Bibb County officials holding office at the time of the ratification of this
amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for
the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego
the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words
"elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining
term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a judge, district attorney,
legislator, school board member, or any official elected from a judicial circuit. All costs
associated with the purchase of prior service credit as prescribed in Section 36-27-6.1, Code of
Alabama 1975, shall be the responsibility of the official making the purchase.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 626 626.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 626

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN AUTAUGA COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     (a) For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed Autauga County
official" shall mean any person holding an office that entitles the person to participate in a
supernumerary program or any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or
appointed county official.
     (b) An elected or appointed Autauga County official may not assume a supernumerary office
after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this
amendment, is entitled to participate in that supernumerary program, may continue to participate
in that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office
according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program.
Every elected or appointed Autauga County official may participate in the Employees'
Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law
for any other employee in the same retirement system. Elected or appointed Autauga County offi-

cials holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase
service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official has served in the
current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary
office and must make the election within one year of the effective date of this amendment.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 627 627.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 627

ANNEXATION IN BALDWIN COUNTY.

     In Baldwin County, the Legislature may not enact a local law annexing to a municipality any
territory that is separated from the annexing municipality by a body of water or separated from
the annexing municipality by an interstate highway and not contiguous and connected to the
municipality by a publicly owned and maintained underpass, overpass, or exchange allowing
toll-free two-way access to and from the annexing municipality unless the annexation is subject
to approval at a referendum election in the territory to be annexed.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 628 628.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 628

COSTS AND CHARGES OF COURTS IN BIBB COUNTY.

     In addition to any court costs and fees now or hereafter authorized in Bibb County, the Bibb
County Commission may impose by resolution of the commission an additional fee in an amount
not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35) to be assessed and taxed as costs on each civil case and on
each criminal case, including traffic cases, but excluding small claims cases, filed in the circuit
court, district court, or any municipal court in Bibb County, as well as an additional fee not to
exceed five dollars ($5) for the service of a pleading or other document in connection with any
action or case. These fees shall not be waived by any court unless all other fees, assessments,
costs, fines, and charges associated with the case are waived.

     The additional fees when collected by the clerks or their collection officers of the courts shall
be paid into the General Fund of Bibb County to be used by the Bibb County Commission for the
planning, designing, construction, financing, furnishing, equipping, and operation of a new
county jail. The Bibb County Commission may set and adjust by resolution the fees within the
limits authorized by this amendment based on the needs associated with the county new jail.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 629 629.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 629

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN CALHOUN COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     (a) For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall
mean any person holding an office that entitles the person to participate in a supernumerary
program or any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county
official.
     (b) A mayor, sheriff, or elected or appointed Calhoun County official may not assume a
supernumerary office after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the
effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may
continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a
supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that
supernumerary program. Every mayor, sheriff, or elected or appointed Calhoun County official
may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and
conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same retirement system.
Calhoun County officials holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be
eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official
has served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a
supernumerary office and must make the election within one year of the effective date of this
amendment.
     (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), the county commission may negotiate
terms of any contract with a sheriff, mayor, or elected or appointed official who under this
amendment will be eligible to participate in the Employees' Retirement System.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 630 630.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 630

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN CHEROKEE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Cherokee County official may assume a supernumerary office after
the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment,
is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Cherokee County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by. law for any
other employee in the same retirement system. Cherokee County officials holding office at the
time of the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the
Employees' Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office. No
person may participate in both a supernumerary program and the Employees' Retirement System
based on the same service. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed
Cherokee County official" include, subject only to express limitation, any person elected to
represent Cherokee County in any representative body of the state and includes any person
appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed Cherokee County official. The
words do not include a judge, district attorney, constable, school board member, or any official
elected from a judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 631 631.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 631

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN CLARKE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected Clarke County official may assume a supernumerary office after the effective date
of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to
participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that supernumerary
program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according to the terms
and conditions of the law which established the particular supernumerary program. Any elected
Clarke County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon
the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same
retirement system. An elected Clarke County official holding office at the effective date of this
amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for
the time the elected county official has served in the current office; provided, however, the
elected county official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For purposes of
this amendment, the term "elected Clarke County official" shall mean any person elected to a
fulltime Clarke County office, and shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining
term of an elected county official, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator,
constable, board of education member, any official elected from a judicial circuit, or any official
who is allowed by law to participate in any other retirement system.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 632 632.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 632

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN CLEBURNE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Cleburne County official may assume a supernumerary office after
the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment,
is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary, office
according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program.
Every elected or appointed Cleburne County official may participate in the Employees'
Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law
for any other employee in the same retirement system. Cleburne County officials holding office
at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the
Employees' Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office. No
person may participate in both a supernumerary program and the Employees' Retirement System
based on the same service. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed
Cleburne County official" include, subject only to express limitation, any person elected to
represent Cleburne County in any representative body of the state and includes any person
appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed Cleburne County official. The
words do not include a judge, district attorney, constable, school board member, or any official
elected from a judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 633 633.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 633

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN COFFEE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     (a) For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall
mean any person holding an office that entitles the person to participate in a supernumerary
program or any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county
official.
     (b) An or elected or appointed Coffee County official may not assume a supernumerary office
after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this
amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in
that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office
according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program.
Every elected or appointed Coffee County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Coffee County officials holding office at the time of the
ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office and must make the election
within one year of the effective date of this amendment.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 634 634.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 634

COSTS AND CHARGES OF COURTS IN CONECUH COUNTY.

     In addition to any court costs or fees now or hereafter authorized, and notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Constitution, including without limitation Sections 96, 104,- and 105,
there shall be an additional forty dollar ($40) fee assessed and taxed as costs on each civil and
criminal case, excluding small claims, filed in circuit court, district court, or any municipal court
in Conecuh County, as well as a fee not to exceed five dollars ($5) for the service of all pleadings
and other documents in connection with any such action or case. The fees may not be waived by
any court unless all other fees, assessments, costs, fines, and charges associated with the cases
are waived. The additional fees, when collected by the clerks or other collection officers of the
courts, shall be paid into the General Fund of Conecuh County to be used by the county
commission for the planning, designing, construction, financing, and operation of a new county
jail and the planning, design, repair, renovation, financing, and operation of the existing county
courthouse. When the costs of the new county jail and the renovated county courthouse have
been fully paid or when the debt service on any indebtedness incurred by the county commission
to finance or refinance the costs have been retired, whichever occurs later, the additional fees
authorized by this amendment shall continue to be collected in all cases and shall be used to pay
costs of the operation, upkeep, and maintenance of a new county jail and the renovated county
courthouse. This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 635 635.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 635

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN CONECUH COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No person elected or appointed Sheriff of Conecuh County, or any elected or appointed
Conecuh County official, may assume a supernumerary office after the effective date of this
amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in
a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which
shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of
the law which established that supernumerary program. Every sheriff and other elected or
appointed Conecuh County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of
Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee
in the same retirement system. Conecuh County officials holding office at the time of the
ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, school board member, or any official elected from a judicial
circuit. All costs associated with the purchase of prior service credit as prescribed in Section
36-2776.1, Code of Alabama 1975, shall be the responsibility of the official making the
purchase.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 636 636.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 636

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN COVINGTON COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No person elected or appointed Sheriff of Covington County, or any elected or appointed
Covington County official, may assume a supernumerary office after the effective date of this
amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in
a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which
shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of
the law which established that supernumerary program.  Every sheriff and other elected or
appointed Covington County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of
Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee
in the same retirement system. Covington County officials holding office at the time of the
ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, school board member, or any official elected from a judicial
circuit. All costs associated with the purchase of prior service credit as prescribed in Section
36-27-6.1, Code of Alabama 1975, shall be the responsibility of the official making the purchase.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 637 637.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 637

COMMISSION AUTHORIZED TO LEVY AD VALOREM TAX FOR FIRE PROTECTION IN
DEKALB COUNTY.

     (a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the DeKalb County Commission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1998, an ad valorem tax
on all taxable property located in DeKalb County, excluding taxable property located within the
city limits of Fort Payne, at a rate of three mills per dollar of assessed value of the taxable
property. The proceeds of the tax levied pursuant to this amendment shall be paid into the county
general fund and distributed for the benefit of fire protection only.  
     (b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay
the funds to the DeKalb County Association of Fire Departments, Incorporated. The county
association shall divide quarterly the funds into equal shares. One share shall be distributed
among all eligible volunteer fire departments, collectively, one share shall be distributed to the
Alabama Forestry Commission, and two shares shall be distributed to the DeKalb County
Association of Fire Departments. Of the two shares distributed to the county association, one
share may be used for administrative duties, the other share may be used for fire protection in
those areas not covered by a fire department, excluding the City of Fort Payne. The county
commission and the county association may jointly establish rules regarding the transfer,
investing, accounting, and handling of the funds.

     (c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. An
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in DeKalb
County that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission, has at least an
ISO class 9 rating, and is a member in good standing of the DeKalb County Association,
Incorporated. The funds may not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or
fund-raising activities. After receiving funds, the eligible volunteer fire departments shall keep
accurate records to verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15th of each
year, each eligible volunteer fire department and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall file a
form with the county association detailing the expenditures of all funds during the previous 12
months and setting out a schedule of all proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all
unspent funds and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. The county association shall
supply the accounting forms to each eligible volunteer fire department and the Alabama Forestry
Commission.
     (d) The Alabama Forestry Commission's share of these funds collected shall be used in
DeKalb County only. The funds shall be used for buildings and purchase of equipment. The
funds shall not be expended for salaries.
     (e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.
     (f) The personnel of volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall
not be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county
commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or
in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of volunteer fire departments and the
Alabama Forestry Commission.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 638 638.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 638

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN ELMORE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Elmore County official may assume a supernumerary office after the
effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective dat6 of this amendment, is
entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Elmore County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Elmore County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board member, or any official elected from a
judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 639 639.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 639

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN FRANKLIN COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Franklin County official may assume a supemumerary office after the
effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is
entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Franklin County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Franklin County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in tile current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not
include a judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board member, or any official
elected from a judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 640 640.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 640

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN GENEVA COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Geneva County official may assume a supernumerary office after the
effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is
entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Geneva County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Geneva County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board member, or any official elected from a
judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 641 641.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 641

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN LEE COUNTY; PARTICIPATION IN
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     In Lee County, no person first taking public office after the effective date of this amendment
may assume a supernumerary office. Persons holding a public office in the county may
participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama in a separately funded unit or
separately funded units if the provisions governing the participation for those persons 'are the
same as for other regular employees participating in the Employees' Retirement System of
Alabama.

     A person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is serving as a supernumerary official
in Lee County, or hasmade an election to become a supernumerary official, or is making
contributions to a supernumerary program, or is otherwise entitled to participate in the
supernumerary program established by statute may continue to serve or participate in the
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office after the
effective date of this amendment, according to the terms and conditions of the law which
established the supernumerary program, notwithstanding the fact that the person may be reelected
after the effective date of this amendment to the public office he or she is holding on the effective
date of this amendment or to another office covered by the supernumerary program in which he
or she is participating. No person may participate in both a supernumerary program and the
Employees' Retirement System based on the same service.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 642 642.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 642

PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN LEE COUNTY.

     For the promotion of local economic and industrial development, the Lee County Commission
and the City Council of the City of Opelika, any other provision of law or of this Constitution
notwithstanding, shall have, independently or in cooperation with one another, full and
continuing power to do any of the following:

     (1) Use public funds to purchase, lease, or otherwise acquire land, or to utilize land heretofore
purchased or otherwise acquired, and improve and develop such land for use as sites for industry
of any kind or as industrial park projects, including, but not limited to, grading and the
construction of roads, drainage, sewers, sewage and waste disposal systems, parking areas, and
utilities to serve such sites or projects.
     (2) Lease, sell, grant, exchange, or otherwise convey, on terms approved by the governing
body of the county or the City of Opelika, as applicable, all or any part of any site or industrial
park project to any individual, firm, corporation, or other business entity, public or private,
including any industrial development board or other public corporation or authority heretofore or
hereafter created by the county or any municipality therein, for the purpose of constructing,
developing, equipping, and operating industrial, commercial, research, or service facilities of any
kind.
     (3) Lend its credit to or grant public funds and things of value in aid of or to any individual,
firm, corporation, or other business entity, public Or private, for the purpose of promoting the
economic and industrial development of Lee County or the City of Opelika.

     In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither Lee County nor the City of Opelika
shall be subject to Sections 93 or 94 of this Constitution.  Each public corporation heretofore
created by Lee County or by the City Of Opelika, including specifically any industrial
development board incorporated under Chapter 54, Article 4, Title 11 of the Code of Alabama
1975, and any industrial development authority incorporated or reincorporated under Chapter
92A, Title 11 of the Code of Alabama 1975, is validated and the powers granted to such board or
authority under its respective enabling legislation are validated notwithstanding any other
provision of law or of this Constitution.

The powers granted in this amendment may be exercised as an alternative to, or cumulative with,
and in no way restrictive of, powers otherwise granted by law to the county, or to any
municipality, or to any agency, board, or authority created pursuant to the laws of this state.

     Neither Lee County nor the City of Opelika shall lend its credit to or grant any public funds or
thing of value to or in aid of any private entity under the authority of this amendment unless prior
thereto: W the action proposed to be taken by Lee County or the City of Opelika is approved at a
public meeting of the governing body of the county or city, as the case may be, by a resolution
containing a determination by such governing body that the expenditure of public funds for such
purpose will serve a valid and sufficient public purpose, notwithstanding any incidental benefit
accruing to any private entity or entities; and (ii) at least seven days prior to the public meeting, a
notice is published in the newspaper having the largest circulation in the county or in the city, as
the case may be, describing in reasonable detail the action proposed to be taken, a description of
the public benefits sought to be achieved by such action, and identifying each individual, firm,
corporation, or other business entity to whom or for whose benefit the county or the city proposes
to lend its credit or grant public funds or thing of value. For purposes of the foregoing, any sale,
lease, or other disposition of property for a price equal to the fair market value thereof shall not
constitute the lending of credit or a grant of public funds or thing of value in aid of a private
entity.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 643 643.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 643

PLANNING AND ZONING REGULATIONS OF MUNICIPALITIES
LOCATED IN LIMESTONE COUNTY.

     In Limestone County, no planning or zoning regulation of a municipality located- wholly or
partially within Limestone County shall extend beyond the corporate limits of the municipality.


(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 644 644.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 644

COSTS AND CHARGES OF COURTS IN LIMESTONE COUNTY.

     The Limestone County Commission may, by resolution duly adopted and spread upon its
minutes, fix, regulate, and alter the costs and charges of the courts in Limestone County to secure
the funds necessary to finance the construction, renovation, and operation of a county jail.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 645 645.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 645

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN LIMESTONE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Limestone County official may assume a supernumerary office after
the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment,
is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Limestone County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Limestone County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees'
Retirement System for the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however,
the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this
amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall include any person appointed
to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county official, but shall not include a
judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board member, or any official elected from a
judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 646 646.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 646

PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN MARENGO
COUNTY.

     For the promotion of local economic and industrial development of Marengo County,
Marengo County Commission and each municipality having its corporate limits located wholly in
the county, other provisions of law or this constitution notwithstanding, shall have, independently
or in cooperation with one or more of such governmental entities, without an election, full and
continuing power to do ail of the following:

     (1) To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real properth plants, buildings,
factories, works, facilities, machinery, and equipment of any kind.
     (2) To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property
describe& in subdivision (1) above, to any person, firm, association, or corporation.
     (3) To promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of
new industries or businesses therein.
     (4) To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to any
individual, firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.
     (5) To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease, or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision (1) or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may be issued upon the full faith and credit of the
municipality or may be limited as to the source of their payment.
     (6) To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by
such board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of the
municipality may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the office of the
Judge of Probate or the Secretary of State, or their respective successors in function, and to
delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all powers and
authority conferred in this amendment upon any such municipality.

     The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness
that they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be
used in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized shall be conclusive, and no
purchaser or holder thereof need inquire further. The bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations
or evidences or indebtedness issued hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of the
county or any such municipality for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the
county or any such municipality under Section 224 or 225 of the Constitution of Alabama of
1901.

     In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither the county nor any such municipality
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 94 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901. This
amendment shall be self-executing, but notwithstanding any contrary provisions of Section 104
of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, the Legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special, or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth. No such special or local act shall be subject to
the provisions of Section 106 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901.  Any actions authorized in
this Amendment to be taken by the municipality which have been taken subsequent to January 1,
1998, are hereby ratified, approved, and confirmed.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 647 647.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 647
EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO AUTHORITY OF PERSONNEL BOARD OF MARSHALL
COUNTY.

     Effective the first day of the sixth month after th e date of the election on the ratification of
this amendment, employees of the Office of the Sheriff of Marshall County, except for the chief
deputy, are subject to the authority of the Personnel Board of Marshall County, or its successor.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 648 648.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 648

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN MOBILE COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected Mobile County official may assume a supernumerary office after the effective date
of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment, is entitled to
participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that supernumerary
program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according to the terms
and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Any elected Mobile
County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the same
terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same retirement
system. An elected Mobile County official holding office at the time of the ratification of this
amendment shall be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for
the time the official has served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego
the assumption of a supernumerary office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words
"elected Mobile County official" shall mean any person elected to a full-time Mobile County
office, and shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected county
official, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school board
member, any official elected from a judicial circuit, or any official who is allowed by law to
participate in any other retirement system.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 649 649.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 649

COMMISSION AUTHORIZED TO LEVY AD VALOREM TAX FOR FIRE PROTECTION IN
PICKENS COUNTY.

     (a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Pickens County Commission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1998, an ad valorem tax
on all taxable property, located in Pickens County at a rate of three mills per dollar of assessed
value of the taxable property. The proceeds of the tax levied pursuant to this amendment shall be
paid into the county general fund and distributed for the benefit of fire protection only.

     (b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay
the funds to the Pickens County Volunteer Firefighters' Association. The county association shall
divide the funds equally among all eligible volunteer fire departments, collectively, and the
Pickens County Volunteer Firefighters' Association at each bimonthly meeting of the county
association. The county association may establish rules regarding the transfer, investing,
accounting, and handling of the funds.

     (c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. An
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in Pickens
County that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission, shall have at
least an -ISO class 9 rating, and is a member in good standing of the Pickens County Association
of Volunteer Fire Departments. The funds may not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social
activities, or fund-raising activities. After receiving funds, the eligible volunteer fire departments
shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15th
of each year, each department shall file a form with the county association detailing the
expenditures of all funds during the previous 12 months and setting out a schedule of all
proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds and whether the unspent
funds have been obligated. The county association shall supply the accounting forms to each
eligible volunteer fire department.

     (d) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.

     (e) The personnel of eligible volunteer fire departments shall not be considered as employees,
servants, or agents of the county and the members of the county commission and the employees
of the county shall not be liable in either their official capacity or in a private capacity for the
actions of the personnel of eligible volunteer fire departments.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 650 650.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 650

COSTS AND CHARGES OF COURTS IN PICKENS COUNTY.

     In addition to any court costs or fees now or hereafter authorized, and notwithstanding any
other provisions of the Constitution, including without limitation Sections 96, 104, and 105,
there shall be an additional twenty-five dollar ($25) fee assessed and taxed as costs on each civil
and criminal case, excluding small claims, filed in circuit court, district court, or any municipal
court in Pickens County, as well as a fee not to exceed five dollars ($5) for the service of all
pleadings and other documents in connection with any such action or case. The fees may not be
waived by any court unless all other fees, assessments, costs, fines, and charges associated with
the cases are waived. The additional fees, when collected by the clerks or other collection officers
of the courts, shall be paid into the General Fund of Pickens County to be used by the county
commission for the planning, designing, construction, financing, and operation of a new county
jail. This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation. On the first
day of the month after the retirement of the debt to finance the construction of a new county jail,
the court cost fee authorized pursuant to this amendment shall expire and this amendment shall
be repealed.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 651 651.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 651

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN RANDOLPH COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed Randolph County official may assume a supernumerary office after
the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment,
is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Every
elected or appointed Randolph County official may participate in the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Randolph County officials holding office at the time of
the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase service creditin the Employees'
Retirement. System for the time the official has served in the current office. No person may
participate in both a supernumerary program and the Employees' Retirement System based on the
same service.  For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed Randolph
County official" include, subject only to express limitation, any person elected to represent
Randolph County i ' n any representative body of the state and includes any person appointed to
serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed Randolph County official. The words do not
include a judge, district attorney, constable, school board member, or any official elected from a
judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 652 652.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 652

COMMISSION AUTHORIZED TO LEVY AD VALOREM TAX FOR FIRE PROTECTION
AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES IN ST. CLAIR COUNTY

     (a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the St. Clair County CoInmission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1, 1997, an ad valorem tax
on all taxable property located in St. Clair County at a rate of two mills per dollar of assessed
value of the taxable property, the proceeds of which shall be paid into an expendable fire
protection trust fund in the county treasury and allocated therefrom for fire protection and
emergency medical services.

     (b) Within 30 days of payment into the fire protection trust fund of the proceeds from the
additional tax levied pursuant to (a), each eligible fire department in the county shall make a
requisition to the county commission for a share of the tax proceeds in the fund. The county
commission shall divide the funds equally among the eligible fire departments of St. Clair
County.

     (c) Funds allocated to eligible fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection and
emergency medical services including day to day operations, training, supplies, buildings, capital
improvements, and equipment. All expenditures shall be documented with the county
commission. An eligible fire department means a fire department located in St. Clair County
which is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission. Any tax proceeds
allocated for fire protection and emergency medical services under this amendment may not be
expended for salaries, food, drink, social activities, or fundraising activities. After receiving
funds, the fire departments shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds were properly
expended. By September 15th of each year, each fire department shall file a form with the county
commission detailing the expenditures of all funds during the previous 12 months and setting out
a schedule of all proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds and
whether the unspent funds have been obligated. The St. Clair County Fire and Emergency
Medical Service Association shall supply the accounting forms to each eligible volunteer fire
department.

     (d) The fire protection trust fund provided for in subsection (a) shall be audited by the State
Department of Examiners of Public Accounts when the county is audited.

     (e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible fire department, any remaining funds
shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred back to the fire protection trust fund
to be allocated to the remaining eligible fire departments.

     (f) Personnel of eligible fire departments shall not be considered as employees, servants, or
agents of the county and the members of the county commission and the employees of the county
shall not be liable in either their official capacity or in a private capacity for the actions of the
personnel of volunteer fire and emergency medical services departments.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 653 653.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 653

COMMISSION AUTHORIZED To LEVY AD VALOREM TAX FOR FIRE PROTECTION IN
SUMTER COUNTY.

     (a) In addition to all other ad valorem taxes levied, the Sumter County Commission may levy
on an annual basis, commencing with the tax year beginning October 1 after the effective date of
this amendment, an ad valorem tax on all taxable property, located in Sumter County at a rate of
three mills per dollar of assessed value of the taxable property. The proceeds of the tax levied
pursuant to this amendment shall be paid into the county general fund and distributed for the
benefit of fire protection only.

     (b) Within 30 days of payment into the county general fund, the county commission shall pay
the funds to the Sumter County Volunteer Firefighters' Association. The county association shall
divide the funds equally among all eligible volunteer fire departments collectively, and the
Alabama Forestry Commission at each bimonthly meeting of the county association. The county
commission and the county association may jointly establish rules regarding the transfer,
investing, accounting, and handling of the funds.

     (c) Funds paid to eligible volunteer fire departments shall only be expended for fire protection
services, including training, supplies, buildings, capital improvements, and equipment. An
eligible volunteer fire department shall mean a volunteer fire department located in Sumter
County that is certified under the guidelines of the Alabama Forestry Commission, shall have at
least an ISO class 9 rating, and is a member in good standing of the Sumter County Association
of Volunteer Fire Departments. The funds may not be expended for salaries, food, drink, social
activities, or fund-raising activities. After receiving funds, the eligible volunteer fire departments
shall keep accurate records to verify that the funds were properly expended. By September 15th
of each year, each department and the Alabama Forestry Commission shall file a form with the
county association detailing the expenditures of all funds during the previous 12 months and
setting out a schedule of all proposed projects. The filing shall also account for all unspent funds
and whether the unspent funds have been obligated. The county. association shall supply the
accounting forms to each eligible volunteer fire department and the Alabama Forestry
Commission.

     (d) The Alabama Forestry Commission's share of the funds collected shall be used in Sumter
County only. The funds shall be used for buildings and purchase of equipment. The funds shall
not be expended for salaries.

     (e) Upon dissolution or abandonment of any eligible volunteer fire department, any remaining
funds shall, after all indebtedness has been satisfied, be transferred to the county association.

     (f) The personnel of eligible volunteer fire departments and the Alabama Forestry
Commission shall not be considered as employees, servants, or agents of the county and the
members of the county commission and the employees of the county shall not be liable in either
their official capacity or in a private capacity for the actions of the personnel of eligible volunteer
fire departments and the Alabama Forestry Commission.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 654 654.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 654

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN TALLADEGA COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     (a) For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed county official" shall
mean any person holding an office that entitles the person to participate in a supernumerary
program or any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed county
official.

     (b) A mayor, sheriff, or elected or appointed Talladega County official may not assume a
supernumerary office after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the
effective date of this amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may
continue to participate in that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a
supernumerary office according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that
supernumerary program. Every mayor, sheriff, or elected or appointed Talladega County official
may participate in the Employees' Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and
conditions as may be specified by law for any other employee in the same retirement system.
Talladega County officials holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall
be eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the
official has served in the current offices provided, however, the official shall forego the
assumption of a supernumerary office and must make the election within one year of the effective
date of this amendment.

     (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), the county commission may negotiate
terms of any contract with a sheriff, mayor, or elected or appointed official who under this
amendment will be eligible to participate in the Employees' Retirement System.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 655 655.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 655

EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO AUTHORITY OF WALKER COUNTY CIVIL SERVICE
BOARD.

     Effective the first day of the sixth month after the ratification of this amendment, all
employees of the Office of the Sheriff of Walker County are subject to the authority of the
Walker County Civil Service Board, or its successor.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 656 656.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 656

PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF BOARD, COMMISSION, AUTHORITY, OR UTILITY
MEMBER IN WALKER COUNTY.

     In Walker County, the appointing authority of any municipal or county board, commission, or
authority may remove for cause any member of the board, commission, public authority, or utility
appointed by the appointing authority after a hearing before the appointing authority by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 657 657.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 657

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN WASHINGTON COUNTY,
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed official of Washington County may assume a supernumerary office
after the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this
amendment, is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in
that supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office
according to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program.
Any elected or appointed Washington County official may participate in the Employees'
Retirement System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law
for any other employee in the same retirement system. Any elected or appointed official of
 Washington County holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be
eligible to purchase service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official
has served in the current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a
supernumerary office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed
official" shall include any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or
appointed official, including the sheriff, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator,
constable, school board member, or any official elected from a judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)
                               
*** MEND ***              

*** MSTART 658 658.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1999 ***

Amendment No. 658

PHASE-OUT OF SUPERNUMERARY PROGRAMS IN WINSTON COUNTY;
PARTICIPATION IN EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.

     No elected or appointed official of Winston County may assume a supernumerary office after
the effective date of this amendment. Any person who, on the effective date of this amendment,
is entitled to participate in a supernumerary program may continue to participate in that
supernumerary program, which shall include the assumption of a supernumerary office according
to the terms and conditions of the law which established that supernumerary program. Any
elected or appointed Winston County official may participate ill the Employees' Retirement
System of Alabama upon the same terms and conditions as may be specified by law for any other
employee in the same retirement system. Any elected or appointed official of Winston County
holding office at the time of the ratification of this amendment shall be eligible to purchase
service credit in the Employees' Retirement System for the time the official has served in the
current office; provided, however, the official shall forego the assumption of a supernumerary
office. For the purposes of this amendment, the words "elected or appointed official" shall
include any person appointed to serve the remaining term of an elected or appointed official,
including the sheriff, but shall not include a judge, district attorney, legislator, constable, school
board member, or any official elected from a judicial circuit.

(Amended 01/06/1999)

*** MEND ***

