This is ready to go.

JW 8/04/03
          

Doug Campbell worked on Colorado

I worked on it in June, and again on 9/29/03

I think it is ready to go.




*** CSTART CO 3/14/1876 1/1/2003 ***




*** MSTART 001 029.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1878 ***

Section 29.  Where officers must reside  Vacancies.  All officers provided for in this article,
excepting judges of the supreme court, shall respectively reside in the district, county, precinct,
city or town for which they may be elected or appointed.  Vacancies occurring in any of the
offices provided for in this article shall be filled by appointment as follows: of judges of the
supreme and district courts, by the governor; of district attorney, by the judge of the court of the
district for which such attorney was elected; and of all other judicial officers, by the board of
county commissioners of the county wherein the vacancy occurs.  Judges of the supreme, district
and county courts appointed under the provisions of this section shall hold office until the next
general election and until their successors elected thereat shall be duly qualified.

[Adopted October 1, 1878.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 002 030.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1882 ***

Section 30.  Except as otherwise provided in this constitution, no law shall extend the term of
any public officer, or increase or diminish his salary or emoluments after his election or
appointment: Provided, That on and after the first day of March, A.D. 1881, the salaries of the
following designated public officers, including those thereof who may then be incumbents of
such offices, shall be as herein provided, viz: The Governor shall receive on annual salary of five
thousand dollars, and the sum of fifteen hundred dollars for the payment of a private secretary. 
The judges of the supreme court shall receive an annual salary of five thousand dollars.  The
judges of the district courts shall each receive an annual salary of four thousand dollars.

[Amended November 7, 1882.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 003 006.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1884 ***

Section 6.  Each member of the first general assembly, until otherwise provided by law, shall
receive as a compensation for his services, seven (7.00) dollars for each day's attendance, and
fifteen cents for each mile necessarily traveled in going to and returning from the seat of
government; and shall receive no other compensation, perquisite, or allowance whatsoever. No
session of the general assembly shall exceed ninety days.  No general assembly shall fix its own
compensation.

[Amendment adopted November 4, 1884.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 004 019.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1884 ***

Section 19. No act of the general assembly shall take effect until ninety days after its passage
unless in case of emergency (which shall be expressed in the act) the general assembly shall, by
vote of two-thirds of all members elected to each house, otherwise direct.  No bill except the
general appropriation bill for the expenses of the government only, introduced in either house of
the general assembly, after the first thirty days of the session shall become law.

[As amended November 4, 1884.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 005 001.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1886 ***

Section 1. Vestment of judicial power. The judicial power of the state as to all matters of law and
equality, except as in the constitution otherwise provided, shall be vested in a supreme court,
district courts, county courts, justices of the peace, and such other courts as may be provided by
law.

[Adopted November 2, 1886.]  

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 006 003.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1886 ***

Section 3. Original jurisdiction   opinions. It shall have power to issue writs of habeas corpus,
mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari, injunction, and such other original and remedial writs, with
authority to hear and determine the same; and each judge of the supreme court shall have like
power and authority as to writs of habeas corpus. The supreme court shall give its opinion upon
important questions upon solemn occasions when required by the governor, the senate, or the
house of representatives; and all such opinions shall be published in connection with the reported
decision of said court. 

[Adopted November 2, 1886.] 
                                   
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 007 014.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1886 ***

Section 14. Number of districts increased or diminished.  The general assembly may (whenever
two-thirds of the members of each house concur therein), increase or diminish the number of
judges for any district, or increase or diminish the number of judicial districts and the judges
thereof.  Such districts shall be formed of compact territory, and be bounded by county lines; but
such increase, diminution, or change in the boundaries of a district shall not work the removal of
any judge from his office during the time for which he shall have been elected or appointed.

[Adopted and effective November 2, 1886]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 008 006.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1888 ***

Section 6.  County indebtedness  How created  Limit.  No county shall contract any debt by
loan in any form except for the purpose of erecting necessary public buildings, making or
repairing public roads and bridges; and such indebtedness contracted in one year shall not exceed
the rates upon taxable property in such county following, to-wit: Counties in which the assessed
valuation of taxable property shall exceed five millions of dollars, one dollar and fifty cents on
each thousand dollars thereof; counties in which such valuation shall be less than five millions of
dollars, three dollars on each thousand dollars thereof, and the aggregate amount of indebtedness
of any county for all purposes, exclusive of debts contracted before the adoption of this
constitution, shall not at any time exceed twice the amount above herein limited, unless when in
manner provided by law, the question of incurring such debt shall, at a general election, be
submitted to such of the qualified electors of such county as in the year last preceding such
election shall have paid a tax upon property assessed to them in such county, and a majority of
those voting thereon shall have vote in favor of incurring the debt; but the bonds, if any be issued
therefor, shall not run less than ten years, and the aggregate amount of the debt so contracted
shall not at any time exceed twice the rate upon the valuation last herein mention; Provided, That
any county in this state which has an indebtedness outstanding, either in the form of warrants
issued for purposes provided by law prior to December 31, A.D. 1886, or in the form of funding
bonds issued prior to such date for such warrants previously outstanding at such date, may
contract a debt by loan by the issuance of bonds for the purposes of liquidating such
indebtedness, provided the question of issuing such bonds shall, at a general or special election
called for that purpose, be submitted to the vote of such duly qualified electors of such county as
in the year last preceding such election shall have paid a tax upon property assessed in such
county, and the majority of those voting shall vote in favor of issuing the bonds.  Such election
shall be held in the manner prescribed by the laws of this state for the issuance of road, bridge
and public building bonds, and the bonds authorized at such election shall be issued and
provision made for their redemption in the same manner as provided in said law.

[Amended November 6, 1888. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 009 011.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1892 ***

Section 11.  Maximum rate of taxation. The rate of taxation on property, for state purposes, shall
never exceed four mills on each dollar of valuation.

[As amended November 8, 1892.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 010 002.0 019.0 0 CO 1876 1900 ***

Section 2. Amendments to constitution   how adopted.   Any amendment or amendments to this
constitution may be proposed in either house of the general assembly, and, if the same shall be
voted for by two thirds of all the members elected to each house, such proposed amendment or
amendments, together with the ayes and noes of each house thereon, shall be entered in full on
their respective journals. The proposed amendment or amendments shall be published with the
laws of that session of the general assembly and the secretary of state shall also cause the said
amendment or amendments to be published in full in not more than one newspaper of general
circulation in each county, for four successive weeks previous to the next general election for
member of the general assembly, and at said election the said amendment shall be submitted to
the qualified electors of the state for their approval or rejection, and such as are approved by a
majority of those voting thereon shall become part of this constitution. 
     If more than one amendment be submitted at any general election, each of said
amendments shall be voted upon separately and votes thereon cast shall be separately counted the
same as though but one amendment was submitted; but each general assembly shall have no
power to propose amendments to more than six articles of this constitution at the same session. 

[As amended November 6, 1900.]
                         
*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 011 025.A 005.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 25a. Eight hour employment. (1) The general assembly shall provide by law, and shall
prescribe suitable penalties for the violation thereof, for a period of employment not to exceed
eight (8) hours within any twenty four (24) hours (except in cases of emergency where life or
property is in imminent danger) for persons employed in underground mines or other
underground workings, blast furnaces, smelters; and any ore reduction works or other branch of
industry or labor that the general assembly may consider injurious or dangerous to health, life or
limb.

[Adopted November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 012 021.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 21. Election  Term  Salary  Qualification.  There shall be elected by qualified electors
of each judicial district, at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and four, and every
four years thereafter, a district attorney for such district, whose term of office shall be four years,
and whose duties and salary or compensation, either from the fees and emoluments of his office
or from the general county fund, as shall be provided by law.
     No person shall be eligible to the office of district attorney who shall not, at the time of
his election, be at least twenty-five years of age and possess all the qualifications of judges of the
district courts, as provided in this article.  The term of office of the district attorneys serving in
the several districts, at the time of the adoption of this amendment is hereby extended to the
second Tuesday of January, in the year A.D. 1905.

[Adopted November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 013 022.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 22. Judge  Election  Term  Salary.  There shall be elected at the general election in
each organized county in the year nineteen hundred and four, and every four years thereafter, a
county judge, who shall be judge of the county court of said county, whose term of office shall be
four years, and who shall be paid such salary or compensation, either form the fees and
emoluments of his office or from the general county fund, as shall be provided by law.
     The term of office of the county judges serving at the time of the adoption of this
amendment is hereby extended to the second Tuesday of January, in the year A.D. 1905.

[Adopted November 4, 1902]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 014 001.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 1.  Qualifications of elector. Every citizen of the United States who has attained the age
of twenty-one years, possessing the following qualifications, shall be entitled to vote at all
elections: He or she shall be a citizen of the United States, and shall have resided in the state
twelve months immediately the election at which he offers to vote, and in the county, city, town,
ward or precinct, such time as may be prescribed by law.

[As amended November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 015 006.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Article 14 not in constitution

Section 6.  County commissioners   election   term. In each county having a population of less
than seventy thousand there shall be elected, for a term of four years each, three county
commissioners who shall hold sessions for the transaction of county business as provided by law;
any two of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Two of said
commissioners shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and four, and
at the general election every four years thereafter; and the other one of said commissioners shall
be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and six, and at the general election
every four years thereafter; provided, that when the population of any county shall equal or
exceed seventy thousand, the board of county commissioners may consist of five members, any
three of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Three of said
commissioners in said county shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred
and four, and at the general election every four years thereafter; and the other two of said
commissioners in such county shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen
hundred and six and every four years thereafter; and all of such commissioners shall be elected
for the term of four years. 

The term of office of the county commissioners in each county that expires in January, 1904, is
hereby extended to the second Tuesday in January, A.D. 1905, and the term of office of the
county commissioners that expires in January, 1906, is hereby extended to the second Tuesday in
January, A.D. 1907; and in counties having a population of more than seventy thousand, the term
of office of the commissioners that expires in 1904 shall be extended to the second Tuesday in
January, 1905, and the term of office of the county commissioners that expires in 1906 is hereby
extended to the second Tuesday in January, 1907. This section shall govern, except as hereafter
otherwise expressly directed or permitted by constitutional enactment. 

[As amended November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 016 008.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 8.  County officers   election   term   salary. There shall be elected in each county, at the
same time at which members of the general assembly are elected, commencing in the year
nineteen hundred and four, one county clerk, who shall be ex officio recorder of deeds and clerk
of the board of county commissioners; one sheriff; one coroner; one treasurer who shall be
collector of taxes; one county superintendent of schools; one county surveyor; one county
assessor; and one county attorney who may be elected, or appointed, as shall be provided by law;
and such officers shall be paid such salary or compensation, either from the fees, perquisites and
emoluments of their respective offices, or from the general county fund, as may be provided by
law. The term of office of all such officials that expire in January, 1904, is hereby extended to the
second Tuesday in January, A.D. 1905.
     This section shall govern, except as hereafter otherwise expressly directed, or permitted
by constitutional enactment.

[As amended November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 017 001.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 1.  Incorporated. The municipal corporation known as the city of Denver and all
municipal corporations and that part of the quasi municipal corporation known as the county of
Arapahoe, in the state of Colorado, included within the exterior boundaries of the said city of
Denver as the same shall be bounded when this amendment takes effect, are hereby consolidated
and are hereby declared to be a single body politic and corporate, by the name of the "City and
County of Denver". By that name said corporation shall have perpetual succession, and shall
own, possess, and hold all property, real and personal, theretofore owned, possessed, or held by
the said city of Denver and by such included municipal corporations, and also all property, real
and personal, theretofore owned, possessed, or held by the said county of Arapahoe, and shall
assume, manage, and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the
rights and liabilities, and shall acquire all benefits and shall assume and pay all bonds,
obligations, and indebtedness of said city of Denver and of said included municipal corporations
and of the county of Arapahoe; by that name may sue and defend, plead and be impleaded, in all
courts and places, and in all matters and proceedings; may have and use a common seal and alter
the same at pleasure; may purchase, receive, hold, and enjoy or sell and dispose of, real and
personal property; may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property, in fee
simple, or in trust for public, charitable, or other purposes; and do all things and acts necessary to
carry out the purposes of such gifts, bequests, and donations, with power to manage, sell, lease,
or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest, or trust; shall
have the power, within or without its territorial limits, to construct, condemn and purchase,
purchase, acquire, lease, add to, maintain, conduct, and operate water works, light plants, power
plants, transportation systems, heating plants, and any other public utilities or works or ways
local in use and extent, in whole or in part, and everything required therefore, for the use of said
city and county and the inhabitants thereof, and any such systems, plants, or works or ways, or
any contracts in relation or connection with either, that may exist and which said city and county
may desire to purchase, in whole or in part, the same or any part thereof may be purchased by
said city and county which may enforce such purchase by proceedings at law as in taking land for
public use by right of eminent domain, and shall have the power to issue bonds upon the vote of
the taxpaying electors, at any special or general election, in any amount necessary to carry out
any of said powers or purposes, as may by the charter be provided. 

The provisions of section 3 of article XIV of this constitution and the general annexation and
consolidation statutes of the state relating to counties shall apply to the city and county of
Denver. Any contiguous town, city, or territory hereafter annexed to or consolidated with the city
and county of Denver, under any such laws of this state, in whatsoever county the same may be at
the time, shall be detached per se from such other county and become a municipal and territorial
part of the city and county of Denver, together with all property thereunto belonging. 

The city and county of Denver shall alone always constitute one judicial district of the state. 

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 018 002.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 2. Officers. The officers of the city and county of Denver shall be such as by appointment
or election may be provided for by the charter; and the jurisdiction, term of office, duties and
qualifications of all such officers shall be such as in the charter may be provided; but the charter
shall designate the officers who shall, respectively, perform the acts and duties required of county
officers to be done by the constitution or by the general law, as far as applicable. If any officer of
said city and county of Denver shall receive any compensation whatever, he or she shall receive
the same as a stated salary, the amount of which shall be fixed by the charter, or, in the case of
officers not in the classified civil service, by ordinance within limits fixed by the charter, and
paid out of the treasury of the city and county of Denver in equal monthly payments.

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 019 003.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 3.  Transfer of government. Immediately upon the canvass of the vote showing the
adoption of this amendment, it shall be the duty of the governor of the state to issue his
proclamation accordingly, and thereupon the city of Denver, and all municipal corporations and
that part of the county of Arapahoe within the boundaries of said city, shall merge into the city
and county of Denver, and the terms of office of all officers of the city of Denver and of all
included municipalities and of the county of Arapahoe shall terminate; except, that the then
mayor, auditor, engineer, council (which shall perform the duties of a board of county
commissioners), police magistrate, chief of police and boards, of the city of Denver shall
become, respectively, said officers of the city and county of Denver, and said engineer shall be ex
officio surveyor and said chief of police shall be ex officio sheriff of the city and county of
Denver; and the then clerk and ex officio recorder, treasurer, assessor and coroner of the county
of Arapahoe, and the justices of the peace and constables holding office within the city of
Denver, shall become, respectively, said officers of the city and county of Denver, and the district
attorney shall also be ex officio attorney of the city and county of Denver. The foregoing officers
shall hold the said offices as above specified only until their successors are duly elected and
qualified as herein provided for; except that the then district judges, county judge and district
attorney shall serve their full terms, respectively, for which elected. The police and firemen of the
city of Denver, except the chief of police as such, shall continue severally as the police and
firemen of the city and county of Denver until they are severally discharged under such civil
service regulations as shall be provided by the charter; and every charter shall provide that the
department of fire and police and the department of public utilities and works shall be under such
civil service regulations as in said charter shall be provided.

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 020 004.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 4.  First charter.  The charter and ordinances of the city of Denver as the same shall exist
when this amendment takes effect, shall, for the time being only, and as far as applicable, be the
charter and ordinances of the city and county of Denver; but the people of the city and county of
Denver are hereby vested with and they shall always have the exclusive power in the making,
altering, revising or amending their charter and, within ten days after the proclamation of the
governor announcing the adoption of this amendment the council of the city and county of
Denver shall, by ordinance, call a special election, to be conducted as provided by law, of the
qualified electors in said city and county of Denver, for the election of twenty one taxpayers who
shall have been qualified electors within the limits thereof for at least five years, who shall
constitute a charter convention to frame a charter for said city and county in harmony with this
amendment. Immediately upon completion, the charter so framed, with a prefatory synopsis, shall
be signed by the officers and members of the convention and delivered to the clerk of said city
and county who shall publish the same in full, with his official certification, in the official
newspaper of said city and county, three times, and a week apart, the first publication being with
the call for a special election, at which the qualified electors of said city and county shall by vote
express their approval or rejection of the said charter. If the said charter shall be approved by a
majority of those voting thereon, then two copies thereof (together with the vote for and against)
duly certified by the said clerk, shall, within ten days after such vote is taken, be filed with the
secretary of state, and shall thereupon become and be the charter of the city and county of
Denver. But if the said charter be rejected, then, within thirty days thereafter, twenty one
members of a new charter convention shall be elected at a special election to be called as above
in said city and county, and they shall proceed as above to frame a charter, which shall in like
manner and to the like end be published and submitted to a vote of said voters for their approval
or rejection. If again rejected, the procedure herein designated shall be repeated (each special
election for members of a new charter convention being within thirty days after each rejection)
until a charter is finally approved by a majority of those voting thereon, and certified (together
with the vote for and against) to the secretary of state as aforesaid, whereupon it shall become the
charter of the said city and county of Denver and shall become the organic law thereof, and
supersede any existing charters and amendments thereof. The members of each of said charter
conventions shall be elected at large; and they shall complete their labors within sixty days after
their respective election. 

     Every ordinance for a special election of charter convention members shall fix the time
and place where the convention shall be held, and shall specify the compensation, if any, to be
paid the officers and members thereof, allowing no compensation in case of non attendance or
tardy attendance, and shall fix the time when the vote shall be taken on the proposed charter, to
be not less than thirty days nor more than sixty days after its delivery to the clerk. The charter
shall make proper provision for continuing, amending or repealing the ordinances of the city and
county of Denver. 

     All expenses of charter conventions shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the
president and secretary thereof. The expenses of elections for charter conventions and of charter
votes shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the council. 

     No franchise relating to any street, alley or public place of said city and county shall be
granted except upon the vote of the qualified electors, and the question of its being granted shall
be submitted to such vote upon deposit with the treasurer of the expense (to be determined by
said treasurer) of such submission by the applicant for said franchise.  The council shall have
power to fix the rate of taxation on property each year for city and county purposes.

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 021 005.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 5.  New charters, amendments or measures. The citizens of the city and county of Denver
shall have the exclusive power to amend their charter or to adopt a new charter, or to adopt any
measure as herein provided; 

It shall be competent for qualified electors in number not less than five percent of the next
preceding gubernatorial vote in said city and county to petition the council for any measure, or
charter amendment, or for a charter convention. The council shall submit the same to a vote of
the qualified electors at the next general election not held within thirty days after such petition is
filed; whenever such petition is signed by qualified electors in number not less than ten percent
of the next preceding gubernatorial vote in said city and county, with a request for a special
election, the council shall submit it at a special election to be held not less than thirty nor more
than sixty days from the date of filing the petition; provided, that any question so submitted at a
special election shall not again be submitted at a special election within two years thereafter. In
submitting any such charter, charter amendment or measure, any alternative article or proposition
may be presented for the choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without prejudice
to others. Whenever the question of a charter convention is carried by a majority of those voting
thereon, a charter convention shall be called through a special election ordinance as provided in
section four (4) hereof, and the same shall be constituted and held and the proposed charter
submitted to a vote of the qualified electors, approved or rejected, and all expenses paid, as in
said section provided. 

The clerk of the city and county shall publish, with his official certification, for three times, a
week apart, in the official newspapers, the first publication to be with his call for the election,
general or special, the full text of any charter, charter amendment, measure, or proposal for a
charter convention, or alternative article or proposition, which is to be submitted to the voters.
Within ten days following the vote the said clerk shall publish once in said newspaper the full
text of any charter, charter amendment, measure, or proposal for a charter convention, or
alternative article or proposition, which shall have been approved by majority of those voting
thereon, and he shall file with the secretary of state two copies thereof (with the vote for and
against) officially certified by him, and the same shall go into effect from the date of such filing.
He shall also certify to the secretary of state, with the vote for and against, two copies of every
defeated alternative article or proposition, charter, charter amendment, measure or proposal for a
charter convention. Each charter shall also provide for a reference upon proper petition therefor,
of measures passed by the council to a vote of the qualified electors, and for the initiative by the
qualified electors of such ordinances as they may by petition request. 

The signatures to petitions in this amendment mentioned need not all be on one paper. Nothing
herein or elsewhere shall prevent the council, if it sees fit, from adopting automatic vote registers
for use at elections and references. 

No charter, charter amendment or measure adopted or defeated under the provisions of this
amendment shall be amended, repealed or revived, except by petition and electoral vote. And no
such charter, charter amendment or measure shall diminish the tax rate for state purposes fixed
by act of the general assembly, or interfere in any wise with the collection of state taxes. 

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 022 006.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 6.  Cities of the first and second class in this state are hereby empowered to propose for
submission to a vote of the qualified electors, proposals for charter conventions and to hold the
same, and to amend any such charter with the same force and in the same manner and have the
same power, as near as may be, as set out in sections four (4) and five (5) hereof, with full power
as to real and personal property and public utilities, works or ways, as set out in section one (1)
of this amendment.

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 023 007.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 7.  City and county of Denver single school district   consolidations. The city and county
of Denver shall alone always constitute one school district, to be known as District No. 1, but its
conduct, affairs and business shall be in the hands of a board of education consisting of such
numbers, elected in such manner as the general school laws of the state shall provide, and until
the first election under said laws of a full board of education which shall be had at the first
election held after the adoption of this amendment, all the directors of school district No. 1, and
the respective presidents of the school boards of school districts Nos. 2, 7, 17 and 21, at the time
this amendment takes effect, shall act as such board of education, and all districts or special
charters now existing are hereby abolished. 

The said board of education shall perform all the acts and duties required to be performed for
said district by the general laws of the state. Except as inconsistent with this amendment, the
general school laws of the state shall, unless the context evinces a contrary intent, be held to
extend and apply to the said "District No. 1". 

Upon the annexation of any contiguous municipality which shall include a school district or
districts or any part of a district, said school district or districts or part shall be merged in said
"District No. 1", which shall then own all the property thereof, real and personal, located within
the boundaries of such annexed municipality, and shall assume and pay all the bonds, obligations
and indebtedness of each of the said included school districts, and a proper proportion of those of
partially included districts. 

Provided, however, that the indebtedness, both principal and interest, which any school district
may be under at the time when it becomes a part, by this amendment or by annexation, of said
"District No. 1", shall be paid by said school district so owing the same by a special tax to be
fixed and certified by the board of education to the council which shall levy the same upon the
property within the boundaries of such district, respectively, as the same existed at the time such
district becomes a part of said "District No. 1", and in case of partially included districts such tax
shall be equitably apportioned upon the several parts thereof.


[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 024 008.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 8.  Conflicting constitutional provisions declared inapplicable. Anything in the
constitution of this state in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment is
hereby declared to be inapplicable to the matters and things by this amendment covered and
provided for.
                    
[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 025 002.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1902 ***

Section 2.  Officers. The officers of the city and county of Denver shall be such as by
appointment or election may be provided for by the charter; and the jurisdiction, term of office,
duties and qualifications of all such officers shall be such as in the charter may be provided; but
the charter shall designate the officers who shall, respectively, perform the acts and duties
required of county officers to be done by the constitution or by the general law, as far as
applicable. If any officer of said city and county of Denver shall receive any compensation
whatever, he or she shall receive the same as a stated salary, the amount of which shall be fixed
by the charter, and paid out of the treasury of the city and county of Denver in equal monthly
payments.

[Added November 4, 1902.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 026 005.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1904 ***

Section 5.  The supreme court shall consist of seven judges, who may sit en banc or in two or
more departments as the court may, from time to time, determine.  In case said court shall sit in
departments, each of said departments shall have full power and authority of said court in the
determination of causes, the issuing of writs and the exercise of all powers authorized by this
constitution, or provided by law, subject to the general control of the court sitting en banc, and
such rules and regulations as the court may make, but no decision of any department shall
become judgment of the court unless concurred in by at least three justices, and no case involving
construction of the constitution of this state or of the United States shall be decided except by the
court en banc.

[Adopted November 8, 1904.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 027 006.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1904 ***

 Section 6. Election of judges.  The judges of the supreme court, except as herein provided, shall
be elected by the electors of the state at large.

[Adopted November 8, 1904]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 028 007.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1904 ***

Section 7.  The term of office of the judges of the supreme court, hereafter elected, except as in
this article otherwise provided, shall be ten years.

[Adopted November 8, 1904]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 029 008.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1904 ***

Section 8.  Appointment and election of judges.  No successor of the judge of the court of
appeals whose term expires in April, 1905, shall be appointed.
     On the first Wednesday of April, 1905, the court of appeals shall cease to exist, and
judges of said court whose regular terms shall not then have expires shall become judges of the
supreme court.  All causes pending before the court of appeals shall then stand transferred to, and
be pending in, the supreme court, and no bond or obligation given in any of said causes shall be
affected by said transfer.
     The term of office of that judge of the supreme court whose term expires on the second
Tuesday in January, 1907, shall so expire; the term of office of that judge transferred from the
court of appeals whose term shall expire in April, 1907, shall expire of the second Tuesday in
January, 1907; and the term of office of that judge of the supreme court whose term expires in
January, 1910, is hereby extended to the second Tuesday in 1911; and the term of office of that
judge or judges transferred from the court of appeals whose term would expire in April, 1909,
shall expire on the second Tuesday in January, 1909; and the term of office of the judges of the
supreme court whose term expires on the second Tuesday in January, 1913, shall so expire.
     At the general election in the year 1906, and every tenth year thereafter, there shall be
elected two judges of the supreme court.
     At the general election in the year 1908, there shall be elected three judges of the supreme
court, one for the term of six years and two for the term of ten years.
     At the general election in the year 1910, and every tenth year thereafter, there shall be
elected one judge of the supreme court.
     At the general election in the year 1912, and every tenth year thereafter, there shall be
elected one judge of the supreme court.
     At the general election in the year 1914, and every tenth year thereafter, there shall be
elected one judge of the supreme court.
     At the general election in the year 1918, and every tenth year thereafter, there shall be
elected two judges of the supreme court.
     Provided, that if said court of appeals shall at the time of the going into effect of this
amendment, by law consist of only three judges, the governor shall nominate and by and with the
consent of the senate appoint two judges of the supreme court whose term shall begin on the first
Wednesday of 1905, and expire on the second Tuesday of January, 1909.
     Provided, also, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the general
assembly from changing the time of electing judges of the supreme court and from extending or
abridging their terms of office as provided in Art. VI, section 15 of the constitution of this state.
     The judge having the shortest time to serve, not holding his office by appointment or
election to fill vacancy, shall be the chief justice.
     Of the two judges whose terms of office expire upon the same day, the younger in years
of the two judges shall be the chief justice during the next to last year of his term of office and
the elder of the two judges shall be chief justice during the last year of his term of office.
     The Chief Justice shall preside at all sessions of the court en banc, and, in the case of his
absence, then the judge present who would be next be entitled to become chief justice shall
preside.
     Until otherwise provided by law, the supreme court shall have power to review the
judgements and proceedings of inferior courts, in such instances and in such manner as was
provided by law previous to the act establishing the court of appeals.

[Adopted November 8, 1904]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 030 003.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1904 ***

Section 3.  All taxes shall be uniform upon each of the same class of subjects within the
territorial limits of the authority levying the tax, and shall be levied, assessed, and collected under
general laws, which shall prescribe such regulations as shall secure a just valuation for taxation
of all property, real and personal,; provided, that the personal property of every person being the
head of a family to the value of $200 shall be exempt from taxation.  Ditches, canals and flumes
owned and used by individuals or corporations for irrigating land owned by such individuals or
corporations, or the individual members thereof, shall not be separately taxed so long as they
shall be owned and exclusively used for such purposes.

[As amended November 8, 1904.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 031 005.0 008.0 0 CO 1876 1909 ***
Section 5.  The following territorial institutions, to-wit, The University at Boulder, the
Agricultural College at Fort Collins, the School of Mines at Golden, and the Institute for the
Education of Mutes (which shall hereafter be known as Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind)
at Colorado Springs, are hereby declared to be institutions of the State of Colorado, and the
management thereof subject to the control of the State, under the provisions of the constitution,
and such laws and regulations as the general assembly may provide, and the location of said
institutions, as well as all gifts, grants, and appropriations of money and property, real and
personal, heretofore made to said several institutions, are hereby confirmed to the use and benefit
of the same respectively: Provided, This section shall not apply to any institution, the property,
real or personal, of which is now vested in the trustees thereof, until such property be transferred
by proper conveyance, together with the control thereof, to the officers provided for the
management of said institution by this constitution or by law; And provided, further, that the
Regents of the University may whenever in their judgement the needs of the institution demand
such action, establish, maintain, and conduct all but the first two years of the departments of
medicine, dentistry and pharmacy, of the University, at Denver; And provided, further, that
nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent state educational institutions from giving
temporary lecture courses, commonly called 'University Extension Work' and 'Farmers' Institute
and Short Courses,' in any part of the state, or conducting class excursions for the purpose of
investigation and study.

[Amended November 10, 1909.]
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 032 001.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1910 ***

Section 1.  General assembly-- Initiative and referendum.  The legislative power of the state
shall be vested in the general assembly consisting of a senate and a house of representatives, both
to be elected by the people, but the people reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and
amendments to the constitution and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the
general assembly, and also reserve power at their own option to approve or reject at the polls any
act, item, section or part of any act of the general assembly.
     The first power hereby reserved by the people is the initiative, and at least eight per cent.
of the legal voters shall be required to propose any measure by petition, and every such petition
shall include the full text of the measure so proposed.  Initiative petitions for state legislation and
amendments to the constitution, shall be addressed to and filed with the secretary of state at least
four months before the election at which they are to be voted upon.
     The second power hereby reserved is the referendum, and it may be ordered, except as to
laws necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, and
appropriations for the support and maintenance of the department of state and state institutions,
against any act, section or part of any act of the general assembly, either by a petition signed by
five per cent. of the legal voters or by the general assembly.  Referendum petitions shall be
addressed to and filed with the secretary of state not more the ninety days after the final
adjournment of the session of the general assembly, that passed the bill on which the referendum
is demanded.  The filing of a referendum petition against any item, section or part of any act,
shall not delay the remainder of the act from becoming operative.  The veto power of the
governor shall not extend to measures initiated by, or referred to the people.  All elections on
measures referred to the people shall be held at the biennial regular general election, and all such
measures shall become the law or a part of the constitution, when approved by a majority of the
votes cast thereon, and not otherwise, and shall take effect from and after the date of the official
declaration of the vote thereon by proclamation of the governor, but not later than thirty days
after the vote has been canvassed.  This section shall not be construed to deprive the general
assembly of the right to enact any measure.  The whole number of votes cast for secretary of state
at the regular general election last preceding the filing of any petition for the initiative or
referendum shall be the basis on which the number of legal voters necessary to sign such petition
shall be counted.
     The secretary of state shall submit all measures initiated by or referred to the people for
adoption or rejection at the polls, in compliance herewith.  The petition shall consist of sheets
having such general form printed or written at the top thereof as shall be designated or prescribed
by the secretary of state; such petition shall be signed by qualified electors in their own proper
persons only, to which shall be attached the residence address of such person and the date of
signing the same.  To each of such petitions, which may consist of one or more sheets, shall be
attached an affidavit of some qualified elector, that each signature thereon is the signature of the
person whose name it purports to be, and that to the best of the knowledge and belief of the
affiant, each of the persons signing said petition was at the time of signing, a qualified elector. 
Such petition so verified shall be prima facie evidence that the signatures thereon are genuine and
true and that the persons signing the same are qualified electors.  The text of all measures to be
submitted shall be published as constitutional amendments are published, and in submitting the
same and in all matters pertaining to the form of all petitions the secretary of state and all other
officers shall be guided by the general laws, and the act submitting this amendment, until
legislation shall be especially provided therefor.
     The style of all laws adopted by the people through the initiative shall be, "Be it Enacted
by the People of the State of Colorado."
     The initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people by this section are hereby
further reserved to the legal voters of every city, town and municipality as to all local, special and
municipal legislation of every character in or for their respective municipalities.  The manner of
exercising said powers shall be prescribed by general laws, except that cities, towns and
municipalities may provide for the manner of exercising the initiative and referendum powers as
to their municipal legislation.  Not more than ten per cent. of the legal voters may be required to
order the referendum, nor more than fifteen per cent. to propose any measure by the initiative in
any city, town or municipality.
     This section of the constitution shall be in all respects self-executing.

[Amendment adopted November 8, 1910.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 033 006.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1910 ***

Section 6.  Compensation of members.  Each member of the general assembly, until otherwise
provided by law, shall receive as compensation for his services the sum of one thousand ($1000)
dollars for each biennial period, payable at the rate of $7.00 per day during both the regular and
special sessions, the remainder, if any, payable on the first day of the last month of each biennial
period; together with all actual and necessary traveling expenses to be paid after the same have
been incurred and audited, and the said members of the general assembly shall receive no other
compensation, perquisite or allowance whatsoever.  No general assembly shall fix its own
compensation.

[Amendment adopted November 8, 1910.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 034 003.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1910 ***

Section 3. Public debt of state   limitations. The state shall not contract any debt by loan in any
form, except to provide for casual deficiencies of revenue, erect public buildings for the use of
the state, suppress insurrection, defend the state, or, in time of war, assist in defending the United
States; and the amount of debt contracted in any one year to provide for deficiencies of revenue
shall not exceed one fourth of a mill on each dollar of valuation of taxable property within the
state, and the aggregate amount of such debt shall not at any time exceed three fourths of a mill
on each dollar of said valuation, until the valuation shall equal one hundred millions of dollars,
and thereafter such debt shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars; and the debt incurred in
any one year for erection of public buildings shall not exceed one half mill on each dollar of said
valuation; and the aggregate amount of such debt shall never at any time exceed the sum of fifty
thousand dollars (except as provided in section 5 of this article), and in all cases the valuation in
this section mentioned shall be that of the assessment last preceding the creation of said debt.
     Provided, that in addition to the amount of debt that may be incurred as above, the state
may contract a debt by loan for the purpose of paying the principal and accrued interest of all the
outstanding warrants issued by this state during and for the years 1887, 1888, 1889, 1892, 1893,
1894 and 1897, said debt to be evidenced by registered coupon interest-bearing funding bonds to
an amount not exceeding $2,115,000.00, or so much thereof as may be necessary to pay said
warrants and interest thereon.
     Said funding bonds shall be dated December 1, 1910, shall be payable at the option of the
state of Colorado at any time after ten years from their date, shall be absolutely due and payable
fifty (50) years after their date, and shall be of the denomination of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
each, or any multiple thereof.  The interest on said bonds shall be payable semi-annually at the
rate of three percent per annum at the office of the state treasurer, or at someplace in the city of
New York, U.S.A., and the principle of said bonds shall be payable at the office of the state
treasurer.
     No such bonds shall be issued except at par and accrued interests, and upon the
contemporaneous surrender and cancellation of a like amount of principle and interest of said
warrants.
     Said bonds to an amount equaling the principal of said warrants now held by the public
school fund shall be registered by the state auditor and state treasurer in the name of and for the
benefit of and payable only to the said fund, and shall not be transferrable.
     And all such bonds to an amount equaling the interest on said warrants now held in the
school fund shall be sold by the state treasurer at not less than par and accrued interest, and the
proceeds thereof paid into the school fund and distributed to the several counties and school
districts of the state for school purposes, in the proportions and in the manner required by law.

     
[As amended November 8, 1910.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 035 009.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1911 ***

Section 9. State board of land commissioners.   The state board of land commissioners shall be
composed of three (3) persons to be appointed by the governor, with the consent of the senate,
who shall have the direction, control, and disposition of the public lands of the state under such
regulations as are and may be prescribed by law, one of which persons shall at the time of his
appointment be designated as president of the board and whose office shall expire on the second
Tuesday of January, 1917, and one of which persons shall at the time of his appointment be
designated as the register of the board and whose office shall expire on the second Tuesday of
January, 1915 and the third member of said board shall at the time of his appointment be
designated as the engineer of the board and shall always be professionally a civil engineer, who,
for at least five (5) years, has been actively engaged in the practice of his profession and whose
office shall expire on the second Tuesday of January, 1913; and the successor and successors of
the first members of the board shall each be appointed for terms of six (6) years.

On the adoption of this amendment by the electors of this state, it shall not go into full force and
effect until the second Tuesday of January, 1911.

The members of the board shall each receive a salary of three thousand dollars ($3,000) per
annum until otherwise provided by law; but the salary of each member of the board is to be paid
out of the income of the state board of land commissioners.

[As Amended January 10, 1911.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 036 001.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 1. Vestment of judicial power. The judicial power of the state as to all matters of law and
equality, except as in the constitution otherwise provided, shall be vested in a supreme court,
district courts, county courts, and such other courts as may be provided by law.  In counties and
cities and counties having a population exceeding 100,000, exclusive original jurisdiction in
cases involving minors and persons whose offenses include minors may be vested in a separate
court now or hereafter established by law.

[Adopted November 5, 1912.]  

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 037 006.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 6.  Home rule for cities and towns. The people of each city or town of this state, having a
population of two thousand inhabitants as determined by the last preceding census taken under
the authority of the United States, the state of Colorado or said city or town, are hereby vested
with, and they shall always have, power to make, amend, add to or replace the charter of said city
or town, which shall be its organic law and extend to all its local and municipal matters. 

Such charter and the ordinances made pursuant thereto in such matters shall supersede within the
territorial limits and other jurisdiction of said city or town any law of the state in conflict
therewith. 

Proposals for charter conventions shall be submitted by the city council or board of trustees, or
other body in which the legislative powers of the city or town shall then be vested, at special
elections, or at general, state or municipal elections, upon petition filed by qualified electors, all
in reasonable conformity with section 5 of this article, and all proceedings thereon or thereafter
shall be in reasonable conformity with sections 4 and 5 of this article. 

From and after the certifying to and filing with the secretary of state of a charter framed and
approved in reasonable conformity with the provisions of this article, such city or town, and the
citizens thereof, shall have the powers set out in sections 1, 4 and 5 of this article, and all other
powers necessary, requisite or proper for the government and administration of its local and
municipal matters, including power to legislate upon, provide, regulate, conduct and control: 

a.  The creation and terms of municipal officers, agencies and employments; the definition,
regulation and alteration of the powers, duties, qualifications and terms or tenure of all municipal
officers, agents and employees; 

b.  The creation of police courts; the definition and regulation of the jurisdiction, powers and
duties thereof, and the election or appointment of police magistrates therefor; 

c.  The creation of municipal courts; the definition and regulation of the jurisdiction, powers and
duties thereof, and the election or appointment of the officers thereof; 

d.  All matters pertaining to municipal elections in such city or town, and to electoral votes
therein on measures submitted under the charter or ordinances thereof, including the calling or
notice and the date of such election or vote, the registration of voters, nominations, nomination
and election systems, judges and clerks of election, the form of ballots, balloting, challenging,
canvassing, certifying the result, securing the purity of elections, guarding against abuses of the
elective franchise, and tending to make such elections or electoral votes non partisan in
character; 

e.  The issuance, refunding and liquidation of all kinds of municipal obligations, including bonds
and other obligations of park, water and local improvement districts; 

f.  The consolidation and management of park or water districts in such cities or towns or within
the jurisdiction thereof; but no such consolidation shall be effective until approved by the vote of
a majority, in each district to be consolidated, of the qualified electors voting therein upon the
question; 

g.  The assessment of property in such city or town for municipal taxation and the levy and
collection of taxes thereon for municipal purposes and special assessments for local
improvements; such assessments, levy and collection of taxes and special assessments to be
made by municipal officials or by the county or state officials as may be provided by the charter; 

h.  The imposition, enforcement and collection of fines and penalties for the violation of any of
the provisions of the charter, or of any ordinance adopted in pursuance of the charter. 

It is the intention of this article to grant and confirm to the people of all municipalities coming
within its provisions the full right of self government in both local and municipal matters and the
enumeration herein of certain powers shall not be construed to deny such cities and towns, and to
the people thereof, any right or power essential or proper to the full exercise of such right. 

The statutes of the state of Colorado, so far as applicable, shall continue to apply to such cities
and towns, except insofar as superseded by the charters of such cities and towns or by ordinance
passed pursuant to such charters. 

All provisions of the charters of the city and county of Denver and the cities of Pueblo, Colorado
Springs and Grand Junction, as heretofore certified to and filed with the secretary of state, and of
the charter of any other city heretofore approved by a majority of those voting thereon and
certified to and filed with the secretary of state, which provisions are not in conflict with this
article, and all elections and electoral votes heretofore had under and pursuant thereto, are hereby
ratified, affirmed and validated as of their date. 

Any act in violation of the provisions of such charter or of any ordinance thereunder shall be
criminal and punishable as such when so provided by any statute now or hereafter in force. 

The provisions of this section 6 shall apply to the city and county of Denver. 

This article shall be in all respects self executing.

[As amended November 5, 1912.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 038 001.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 1.  State officers may be recalled. Every elective public officer of the state of Colorado
may be recalled from office at any time by the qualified electors entitled to vote for a successor
of such incumbent through the procedure and in the manner herein provided for, which procedure
shall be known as the recall, and shall be in addition to and without excluding any other method
of removal provided by law. 

The procedure hereunder to effect the recall of an elective public officer shall be as follows: 

A petition signed by qualified electors entitled to vote for a successor of the incumbent sought to
be recalled, equal in number to twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding
election for all candidates for the position which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies,
demanding an election of the successor to the officer named in said petition, shall be filed in the
office in which petitions for nominations to office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled
are required to be filed; provided, if more than one person is required by law to be elected to fill
the office of which the person sought to be recalled is an incumbent, then the said petition shall
be signed by qualified electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be
recalled equal in number to twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding
general election for all candidates for the office, to which the incumbent sought to be recalled
was elected as one of the officers thereof, said entire vote being divided by the number of all
officers elected to such office, at the last preceding general election; and such petition shall
contain a general statement, in not more than two hundred words, of the ground or grounds on
which such recall is sought, which statement is intended for the information of the qualified
electors, and the qualified electors shall be the sole and exclusive judges of the legality,
reasonableness and sufficiency of such ground or grounds assigned for such recall, and said
ground or grounds shall not be open to review.

[Added November 5, 1912.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 039 002.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 2.  Form of recall petition. Any recall petition may be circulated and signed in sections,
provided each section shall contain a full and accurate copy of the title and text of the petition;
and such recall petition shall be filed in the office in which petitions for nominations to office
held by the incumbent sought to be recalled are required to be filed. 

The signatures to such recall petition need not all be on one sheet of paper, but each signer must
add to his signature the date of his signing said petition, and his place of residence, giving his
street number, if any, should he reside in a town or city. The person circulating such sheet must
make and subscribe an oath on said sheet that the signatures thereon are genuine, and a false
oath, willfully so made and subscribed by such person, shall be perjury and be punished as such.
All petitions shall be deemed and held to be sufficient if they appear to be signed by the requisite
number of signers, and such signers shall be deemed and held to be qualified electors, unless a
protest in writing under oath shall be filed in the office in which such petition has been filed, by
some qualified elector, within fifteen days after such petition is filed, setting forth specifically the
grounds of such protest, whereupon the officer with whom such petition is filed shall forthwith
mail a copy of such protest to the person or persons named in such petition as representing the
signers thereof, together with a notice fixing a time for hearing such protest not less than five nor
more than ten days after such notice is mailed. All hearings shall be before the officer with whom
such protest is filed, and all testimony shall be under oath. Such hearings shall be summary and
not subject to delay, and must be concluded within thirty days after such petition is filed, and the
result thereof shall be forthwith certified to the person or persons representing the signers of such
petition. In case the petition is not sufficient it may be withdrawn by the person or a majority of
the persons representing the signers of such petition, and may, within fifteen days thereafter, be
amended and refiled as an original petition. The finding as to the sufficiency of any petition may
be reviewed by any state court of general jurisdiction in the county in which such petition is filed,
upon application of the person or a majority of the persons representing the signers of such
petition, but such review shall be had and determined forthwith. The sufficiency, or the
determination of the sufficiency, of the petition referred to in this section shall not be held, or
construed, to refer to the ground or grounds assigned in such petition for the recall of the
incumbent sought to be recalled from office thereby. 

When such petition is sufficient, the officer with whom such recall petition was filed, shall
forthwith submit said petition, together with a certificate of its sufficiency to the governor, who
shall thereupon order and fix the date for holding the election not less than thirty days nor more
than sixty days from the date of submission of said petition; provided, if a general election is to
be held within ninety days after the date of submission of said petition, the recall election shall be
held as part of said general election.

[Added November 5, 1912.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 040 003.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 3.  Resignation   filling vacancy. If such officer shall offer his resignation, it shall be
accepted, and the vacancy caused by such resignation, or from any other cause, shall be filled as
provided by law; but the person appointed to fill such vacancy shall hold his office only until the
person elected at the recall election shall qualify. If such officer shall not resign within five days
after the sufficiency of the recall petition shall have been sustained, the governor shall make or
cause to be made publication of notice for the holding of such election, and officers charged by
law with duties concerning elections shall make all arrangements for such election, and the same
shall be conducted, returned and the result thereof declared in all respects as in the case of
general elections. 

On the official ballot at such elections shall be printed in not more than 200 words, the reasons
set forth in the petition for demanding his recall, and in not more than three hundred words there
shall also be printed, if desired by him, the officer's justification of his course in office. If such
officer shall resign at any time subsequent to the filing thereof, the recall election shall be called
notwithstanding such resignation. 

There shall be printed on the official ballot, as to every officer whose recall is to be voted on, the
words, "Shall (name of person against whom the recall petition is filed) be recalled from the
office of (title of the office)?" Following such question shall be the words, "Yes" and "No", on
separate lines, with a blank space at the right of each, in which the voter shall indicate, by
marking a cross (X), his vote for or against such recall. 

On such ballots, under each question, there shall also be printed the names of those persons who
have been nominated as candidates to succeed the person sought to be recalled; but no vote cast
shall be counted for any candidate for such office, unless the voter also voted for or against the
recall of such person sought to be recalled from said office. The name of the person against
whom the petition is filed shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office. 

If a majority of those voting on said question of the recall of any incumbent from office shall
vote "no", said incumbent shall continue in said office; if a majority shall vote "yes", such
incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed from such office upon the qualification of his
successor. 

If the vote had in such recall elections shall recall the officer then the candidate who has received
the highest number of votes for the office thereby vacated shall be declared elected for the
remainder of the term, and a certificate of election shall be forthwith issued to him by the
canvassing board. In case the person who received the highest number of votes shall fail to
qualify within fifteen days after the issuance of a certificate of election, the office shall be
deemed vacant, and shall be filled according to law. 

Candidates for the office may be nominated by petition, as now provided by law, which petition
shall be filed in the office in which petitions for nomination to office are required by law to be
filed not less than fifteen days before such recall election.

[Added November 5, 1912.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 041 004.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1912 ***

Section 4.  Limitation   municipal corporations may adopt, when. No recall petition shall be
circulated or filed against any officer until he has actually held his office for at least six months,
save and except it may be filed against any member of the state legislature at any time after five
days from the convening and organizing of the legislature after his election. 

After one recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed against the same officer
during the term for which he was elected, unless the petitioners signing said petition shall equal
fifty percent of the votes cast at the last preceding general election for all of the candidates for the
office held by such officer as herein above defined. 

If at any recall election the incumbent whose recall is sought is not recalled, he shall be repaid
from the state treasury any money authorized by law and actually expended by him as expenses
of said election; and the legislature shall provide appropriations for such purpose.

If the governor is sought to be recalled under the provisions of this article, the duties herein
imposed upon him shall be performed by the lieutenant governor; and if the secretary of state is
sought to be recalled, the duties herein imposed upon him, shall be performed by the state
auditor. 

The recall may also be exercised by the qualified electors of each county, city and county, city
and town of the state, with reference to the elective officers thereof, under such procedure as
shall be provided by law. 

Until otherwise provided by law, the legislative body of any such county, city and county, city
and town may provide for the manner of exercising such recall powers in such counties, cities
and counties, cities and towns, but shall not require any such recall to be signed by qualified
electors more in number than twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding
election, as in section 1 hereof more particularly set forth, for all the candidates for office which
the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies, as herein above defined. 

Every person having authority to exercise or exercising any public or governmental duty, power
or function, shall be an elective officer, or one appointed, drawn or designated in accordance with
law by an elective officer or officers, or by some board, commission, person or persons legally
appointed by an elective officer or officers, each of which said elective officers shall be subject to
the recall provision of this constitution; provided, that, subject to regulation by law, any person
may, without compensation therefor, file petitions, or complaints in courts concerning crimes, or
do police duty only in cases of immediate danger to person or property. 

Nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting or limiting the present or future powers
of cities and counties or cities having charters adopted under the authority given by the
constitution, except as in the last three preceding paragraphs expressed. 

In the submission to the electors of any petition proposed under this article, all officers shall be
guided by the general laws of the state, except as otherwise herein provided. 

This article is self executing, but legislation may be enacted to facilitate its operations, but in no
way limiting or restricting the provisions of this article, or the powers herein reserved.

[Added November 5, 1912.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 042 015.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1914 ***

Section 15.  There shall be a board of equalization for the state, consisting of the governor, state
auditor, state treasurer, secretary of state and attorney general.  The duty of said board of
equalization shall be to adjust, equalize, raise or lower the valuation of real and personal property
of the several counties of the state, and the valuation of any item or items of the various classes
of such property.

There shall be in each county of the state a county board of equalization, consisting of the board
of county commissioners of said county.  The duty of the county board of equalization shall be to
adjust, equalize, raise or lower the valuation of real and personal property within their respective
counties, subject to revision, change and amendment by the state board of equalization.  The state
board of equalization and the county board of equalization shall equalize to the end that all
taxable property in the state shall be assessed at its full case value and also perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by law; Provided, However, That the state board of equalization shall
have no power of original assessment.

[As amended November 3, 1914.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 043 001.0 022.0 0 CO 1876 1916 ***

?? I think this is a new article

Section 1.  Intoxicating Liquors. From and after the first day of January, 1916, no person,
association or corporation shall, within this state, manufacture for sale or gift any intoxicating
liquors; and no person, association or corporation shall, within this state, sell or keep for sale any
intoxicating liquors or offer any intoxicating liquors for sale, barter or trade; Provided, however,
that the handling of intoxicating liquors for medical or sacramental purposes may be provided for
by statute.

[As added 1916]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 044 019.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1918 ***

Section 19. No act of the general assembly shall take effect until ninety days after its passage
unless in case of emergency (which shall be expressed in the act) the general assembly shall, by
vote of two-thirds of all members elected to each house, otherwise direct.  No bill except the
general appropriation bill for the expenses of the government only, introduced in either house of
the general assembly, after the first fifteen days of the session shall become law.

[As amended November 5, 1918.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 045 013.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1918 ***

Missing Article 12, not in constitution

Section 13.  Civil service   Apply merit system.  Appointments and employments in and
promotions to offices and places of trust and employment in the classified civil service of the
state shall be made according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained by competitive tests of
competence, the person ascertained to be the most fit and of the highest excellence to be first
appointed.  All appointees shall be qualified electors of the state of Colorado, except as to those
offices or positions held by the civil service commission to require special training and technical
qualifications, in which case competitive tests need not be limited to qualified electors and may
be held without the state.
     The classified civil service of the state shall comprise all appointive public officers and
employees and the places which they hold, except the following: Judges of the courts of record
and one stenographer of each judge, one clerk for each court of record, persons appointed to
perform judicial functions, receivers, jurors, members of boards or commissions appointed by the
governor and serving without pay, members of the state industrial commission, of the public
utilities commission and of the state civil service commission, the governor's private secretary
and three confidential employees of his office, appointees to fill vacancies in elective offices, one
deputy of each elective officer, the position involving the duties incident at present to the
position of that deputy of the secretary of state, known as deputy commissioner of labor and the
incumbent thereof, officers and teachers in educational institutions not reformatory or charitable
in character, all attorneys at law serving as such, and the officers and employees of the general
assembly.
     Persons in the classified service shall hold their respective positions during efficient
service and shall be graded and compensated according to standards of efficient service which
shall be the same for all persons having like duties.  They shall be removed or disciplined only
upon written charges, which may be filed by the head of a department or by any citizen of the
state, for failure to comply with such standards, or for the good of service, to be finally and
promptly determined by the commission upon inquiry and after an opportunity to be heard.  No
person shall be discharged for a political or a religious reason.  In cases of emergency or for
employment of an essentially temporary character, the commission may authorize temporary
employment without a competitive test.
     Laws shall be made to enforce the provisions of this section and to establish a state civil
service commission to consist of three members who shall be appointed for overlapping terms by
the governor alone and who shall be persons of known devotion to the merit system.  The first
three commissions appointed hereunder shall hold for two, four and six years respectively. 
Thereafter the term of a commissioner shall be six years, except where an appointment is made to
fill an unexpired term.  A salary of not less than $2,500 per annum shall be paid to each
commissioner.  The making and enforcement of rules to carry out the purposes of this
amendment and of the laws enacted in pursuance thereof, the alteration and recission of such
rules, the conduct of all competitive tests, the determination of all removal and disciplinary cases,
the standardization of all positions, the determination of standards of efficient service and the
determination of the grades of all positions in the classified service shall be vested in the
commission.  No person in the classified service shall be paid until a certificate is furnished by
the commission that the appointment has been made pursuant to law.
     Adequate appropriations shall be made to carry out the purposes of this section and in the
absence of such adequate appropriations the salaries and expenses of the commission shall be
paid as are the salaries and expenses of the executive officers of the state government.
     All persons holding positions in the classified service as herein defined when this section
takes effect shall retain their positions until removed under the provisions of the laws enacted in
pursuance hereof.
     This section shall be self executing.

[Adopted November 5, 1918.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 046 001.0 023.0 0 CO 1876 1918 ***

?? I think this must be a new article

Section 1. Publication of proposed constitutional amendments and initiated and referred bills. 
Proposed constitutional amendments and proposed initiated and referred bills shall be published
in two issues of two newspapers of opposite political faith in each county in the state.  This
publication shall be made at least one week apart and not less than three nor more than five
weeks before the election at which the said amendments or initiated or referred bills are to be
voted upon.

[Adopted November 5, 1918.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 047 011.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1920 ***

Section 11.  Maximum rate of taxation. The rate of taxation on property, for state purposes, shall
never exceed four mills on each dollar of valuation; provided, however, that in the discretion of
the general assembly an additional levy of not to exceed one mill on each dollar of valuation may
from time to time be authorized for the erection of additional buildings at, and for the use,
benefit, maintenance, and support of the state educational institutions; provided, further, that the
rate of taxation on property for all state purposes, including the additional levy herein provided
for, shall never exceed five mills on each dollar of valuation, unless otherwise provided in the
constitution.

[As amended November 2, 1920.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 048 003.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1920 ***

Section 3. Public debt of state   limitations. The state shall not contract any debt by loan in any
form, except to provide for casual deficiencies of revenue, erect public buildings for the use of
the state, suppress insurrection, defend the state, or, in time of war, assist in defending the United
States; and the amount of debt contracted in any one year to provide for deficiencies of revenue
shall not exceed one fourth of a mill on each dollar of valuation of taxable property within the
state, and the aggregate amount of such debt shall not at any time exceed three fourths of a mill
on each dollar of said valuation, until the valuation shall equal one hundred millions of dollars,
and thereafter such debt shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars; and the debt incurred in
any one year for erection of public buildings shall not exceed one half mill on each dollar of said
valuation; and the aggregate amount of such debt shall never at any time exceed the sum of fifty
thousand dollars (except as provided in section 5 of this article), and in all cases the valuation in
this section mentioned shall be that of the assessment last preceding the creation of said debt.
     Provided, that in addition to the amount of debt that may be incurred as above, the state
may contract a debt by loan for the purpose of paying the principal and accrued interest of all the
outstanding warrants issued by this state during and for the years 1887, 1888, 1889, 1892, 1893,
1894 and 1897, said debt to be evidenced by registered coupon interest-bearing funding bonds to
an amount not exceeding $2,115,000.00, or so much thereof as may be necessary to pay said
warrants and interest thereon.
     Said funding bonds shall be dated December 1, 1910, shall be payable at the option of the
state of Colorado at any time after ten years from their date, shall be absolutely due and payable
fifty (50) years after their date, and shall be of the denomination of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
each, or any multiple thereof.  The interest on said bonds shall be payable semi-annually at the
rate of three percent per annum at the office of the state treasurer, or at someplace in the city of
New York, U.S.A., and the principle of said bonds shall be payable at the office of the state
treasurer.
     No such bonds shall be issued except at par and accrued interests, and upon the
contemporaneous surrender and cancellation of a like amount of principle and interest of said
warrants.
     Said bonds to an amount equaling the principal of said warrants now held by the public
school fund shall be registered by the state auditor and state treasurer in the name of and for the
benefit of and payable only to the said fund, and shall not be transferrable.
     And all such bonds to an amount equaling the interest on said warrants now held in the
school fund shall be sold by the state treasurer at not less than par and accrued interest, and the
proceeds thereof paid into the school fund and distributed to the several counties and school
districts of the state for school purposes, in the proportions and in the manner required by law.

     And provided further, that, in addition to the amount of debt that may be incurred as
above, the state may contract a debt by loan for the purpose of creating a fund to be expended as
provided by law, by the state highway commission for the construction and improvement of the
highways in the state of Colorado; said debt to be evidenced by registered coupon interest-
bearing bonds to an amount not exceeding five million dollars.
     Said bonds, to an extent not exceeding two million dollars, shall be dated June first, 1921;
not exceeding three million dollars, dated June first 1922; and said bonds shall be payable at the
option of the state of Colorado at any time after ten years from their respective dates, and shall be
of the denomination of fifty dollars ($50.00) each or any multiple thereof.  The interest on said
bonds shall be payable semi-annually at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum at the office of
the state treasurer, or at someplace in the city of New York, U.S.A., and the principle of said
bonds shall be payable at the office of the state treasurer.
     No such bonds shall be issued except at par and accrued interest.
     Fifty percent of the proceeds from the sale of said bonds shall be divided among the
various counties of the state according to the mileage of state routes and state highways within
said counties, and the remaining fifty percent of the proceeds from the sale of said bonds shall be
used by the state highway commission only to meet and accept federal aid awarded to the state of
Colorado by United States congressional acts.
     And provided further, that in addition to the amount of debt that may be incurred as
above, the state may contract a debt by loan for the purpose of creating a fund to be expended as
provided by law, by the state highway department, for the construction and improvement of
public highways in the state of Colorado; said debt to be evidenced by registered coupon interest-
bearing bonds to an amount not exceeding six million dollars.
     Said bonds, to an extent not exceeding one million five hundred thousand dollars, shall be
dated June first, 1923; not exceeding one million five hundred thousand dollars, shall be dated
June first, 1924; not exceeding one million five hundred thousand dollars, shall be dated June
first, 1925; not exceeding one million five hundred thousand dollars, shall be dated June first,
1926;  said bonds shall be issued payable serially.  The last maturing series of each issue shall be
absolutely due and payable not exceeding twenty (20) years from and after the date thereof, and
shall be of the denomination of one hundred dollars ($100.00) each, or any multiple thereof.  The
interest on said bonds shall be payable semi-annually, at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum
at the office of the state treasurer, or at someplace in the city of New York, U.S.A., and the
principle of said bonds shall be payable at the office of the state treasurer.
     No such bonds shall be issued except at par and accrued interest.
     The moneys, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, payable to the credit and account
of the state highway fund from the proceeds of motor vehicle registration license fees, under
chapter one hundred sixty-one (161) of the Session Laws of Colorado of the year 1919, and all
acts amendatory or in substitution thereof, shall be applied to the payment of interest and
principal of the bonds of the six million dollar authorized issue herein, but the revenues provided
by said chapter to be credited to the account of the state highway fund shall never be diminished
until all bonds issued by virtue of this amendment shall have been payed off and redeemed;
nothing herein however shall be construed to prevent the enactment of laws whereby the amount
of revenue derivable from motor vehicle registration license and payable into the said fund shall
be increased.
     The general assembly shall, as by law provided, enact all such laws as may be necessary
with reference to said bonds and with reference to carrying out the projects and purposes herein
specified.

[As amended November 2, 1920.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 049 005.0 008.0 0 CO 1876 1922 ***

Section 5.
The following territorial institutions, to wit, The University at Boulder, the Agricultural College
at Fort Collins, the School of Mines at Golden, the Institute for the Education of Mutes (which
shall hereafter be known as Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind) at Colorado Springs, are
hereby declared to be institutions of the State of Colorado, and the management thereof subject
to the control of the State, under the provisions of the constitution, and such laws and regulations
as the general assembly may provide, and the location of said institutions, as well as all gifts,
grants, and appropriations of money and property, real and personal, heretofore made to said
several institutions, are hereby confirmed to the use and benefit of the same respectively:
Provided, This section shall not apply to any institution, the property, real or personal, of which
is now vested in the trustees thereof, until such property be transferred by proper conveyance,
together with the control thereof, to the officers provided for the management of said institution
by this constitution or by law; And provided, further, that the Regents of the University may
whenever in their judgement the needs of the institution demand such action, establish, maintain,
and conduct all or any part of the departments of medicine, dentistry, and pharmacy of the
University, at Denver; And provided, further, that nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent state educational institutions from giving temporary lecture courses, commonly called
'University Extension Work' and 'Farmers' Institute and Short Courses,' in any part of the state,
or conducting class excursions for the purpose of investigation and study.

[As amended December 21, 1922.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 050 030.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1928 ***

Section 30. Extension of term and increase of salary of public officers. The salaries of the
Governor, the Governor's Secretary, and the Judges of the Supreme and District Courts shall be
fixed by legislative enactment; provided, that the salaries of said officers heretofore fixed by the
Constitution shall continue in force until otherwise provided for by legislative enactment.

No law shall extend the term of any public officer, or increase or decrease his salary, after his
election or appointment, as fixed by legislative enactment. 

[As amended November 6, 1928.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 051 001.0 022.0 0 CO 1876 1932 ***

Section 1.  Repeal of intoxicating liquor laws. On the thirtieth day of June, 1933, all statutory
laws of the state of Colorado heretofore enacted concerning or relating to intoxicating liquors
shall become void and of no effect; and from and after July 1st, 1933, the manufacture, sale and
distribution of all intoxicating liquors, wholly within the state of Colorado, shall, subject to the
constitution and laws of the United States, be performed exclusively by or through such agencies
and under such regulations as may hereafter be provided by statutory laws of the state of
Colorado; but no such laws shall ever authorize the establishment or maintenance of any saloon. 

[As amended November 8, 1932.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 052 018.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1934 ***

Section 18.  License fees and excise taxes   use of. On and after July 1, 1935, the proceeds from
the imposition of any license, registration fee, or other charge with respect to the operation of any
motor vehicle upon any public highway in this state and the proceeds from the imposition of any
excise tax on gasoline or other liquid motor fuel shall, except costs of administration, be used
exclusively for the construction, maintenance, and supervision of the public highways of this
state. 

[As amended November 3, 1934.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 053 005.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 5.  Property used for religious worship, schools and charitable purposes exempt.
Property, real and personal, that is used solely and exclusively for religious worship, for schools
or for strictly charitable purposes, also cemeteries not used or held for private or corporate profit,
shall be exempt from taxation, unless otherwise provided by general law.

[As amended November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 054 017.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 17.  Income tax. The general assembly may levy income taxes, either graduated or
proportional, or both graduated and proportional, for the support of the state, or any political
subdivision thereof, or for public schools, and may, in the administration of an income tax law,
provide for special classified or limited taxation or the exemption of tangible and intangible
personal property.

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 055 001.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 1.  Fund created. A fund to be known as the old age pension fund is hereby created and
established in the treasury of the state of Colorado.

[Added November 3, 1936.]
     
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 056 002.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 2.  Moneys allocated to fund. There is hereby set aside, allocated and allotted to the old
age pension fund sums and money as follows: 

(a)  Beginning January 1, 1937, eighty five percent of all net revenue accrued or accruing,
received or receivable from any and all excise taxes now or hereafter levied upon sales at retail,
or any other purchase transaction; together with eighty five percent of the net revenue derived
from any excise taxes now or hereafter levied upon the storage, use, or consumption of any
commodity or product; together with eighty five percent of all license fees imposed by the
provisions of  Chapter 189, Session Laws of Colorado, 1935, and amendments thereto; provided,
however, that no part of the revenue derived from excise taxes now or hereafter levied, for
highway purposes, upon gasoline or other motor fuel, shall be made a part of said old age
pension fund. 

(b)  Beginning January 1, 1937, eighty five percent of all net revenue accrued or accruing,
received or receivable from taxes of whatever kind upon all malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor,
both intoxicating and non intoxicating, and license fees connected therewith. 

(c)  All unexpended money in any fund of the state of Colorado, or political subdivision thereof,
as of January 1, 1937, which prior to said date has been allocated to the payment of an old age
pension. 

(d)  All grants in aid from the federal government for old age assistance. 

(e)  All inheritance taxes and incorporation fees appropriated under Chapter 145, Session Laws
of Colorado, 1933, for old age pensions. 

(f)  Such other money as may be allocated to said fund by the general assembly.

[Added November 3, 1936.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 057 003.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 3.  Persons entitled to receive pensions. From and after January 1, 1937, every citizen of
the United States who has been a resident of the state of Colorado for such period as the General
Assembly may determine, who has attained the age of sixty years or more, and who qualifies
under the laws of Colorado to receive a pension, shall be entitled to receive the same; provided,
however, that no person otherwise qualified shall be denied a pension by reason of the fact that
he is the owner of real estate occupied by him as a residence; nor shall any person be denied a
pension for the reason that he owns personal property which by law is exempt from execution or
attachment; nor shall any person be required, in order to receive a pension, to repay, or promise
to repay, the state of Colorado any money paid to him as an old age pension.

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 058 004.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 4.  The state board of public welfare to administer fund. The state board of public
welfare, or such other agency as may be authorized by law to administer old age pensions, shall
cause all moneys deposited in the old age pension fund to be paid out to qualified pensioners,
after defraying the expense of administering the said fund, within ten days following the
expiration of the calender year in which the deposits are made in said fund.

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***
     
*** MSTART 059 005.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 5.  Revenues for old age pension fund continued. The excise taxes on sales at retail,
together with all license fees levied by the provisions of Chapter 189, Session Laws, 1935, as
amended, are hereby continued in full force and effect beyond the date on which said taxes and
license fees would otherwise expire, and shall continue until repealed or amended; provided,
however, that no law providing revenue for the old age pension fund shall be repealed, nor shall
any such law be amended so as to reduce the revenue provided for the old age pension fund,
except in the event that at the time of such repeal or amendment, revenue is provided for the old
age pension fund in an amount at least equal to that provided by the measure amended or
repealed during the calendar year immediately preceding the proposed amendment or repeal.

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 060 006.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 6.  Basic minimum award. (a) Beginning January 1, 1937, a minimum pension of forty-
five dollars ($45.00) per month shall be paid to those who qualify to receive a pension; and no
variation in the amount paid, or other discrimination between persons eligible, shall be permitted;
Provided, however, That the amount of net income, from whatever source, that any person
eligible for a pension may have, shall be deducted from the amount of the pension which such
person would otherwise receive. 

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 061 007.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1936 ***

Section 7.  Stabilization fund and health and medical care fund. (a) All the moneys deposited in
the old age pension fund shall remain inviolate for purposes which created, and no part thereof
shall be transferred to any other fund, or used or appropriated for any other purpose.

[Added November 3, 1936.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 062 014.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1944 ***

Section 14.  Veterans preference.  In each and every examination held or conducted by the State
Civil Service Commission, the State Merit Council, the civil service commission of any political
subdivision of the State, including cities, towns and cities and counties chartered or to be
chartered under the XXth amendment to the Constitution of the State of Colorado, or by the
successors of any such commissions or council having all or a part of the duties thereof, or held
or conducted by any other officer, agency, department of the State or employee thereof, for
appointment and employment in and promotions to offices and places of trust and employment in
the classified civil service of the State, or in the civil service or any of its political subdivisions as
aforesaid, the passing grade for each candidate shall be the same.  Five points shall be added to
the grades of candidates receiving a passing grade who served in the armed forces of the United
States in times of war and who were honorably discharged therefrom, and also to the grades of
candidates who are widows of those who so served and were so discharged or who died during
their service.  Ten points shall be added to the grades of candidates receiving a passing grade
who incurred disability in the line of duty while so serving, and who were so discharged. 
Eligibility lists shall be kept and maintained for reasonable periods of all who have made passing
grades in such examinations and the candidates placed thereon in the order of the grades received
by them, including any points added as herein provided.  The persons on said lists shall be
deemed the most fit and of the highest excellence, and shall be appointed or promoted in
accordance with their order thereon.
     The times of war above referred to are the period of the Spanish-American War; the
period of the Philippine Insurrection; the period from April 6, 1917, to November 11, 1918, both
dates inclusive; the period from December 7, 1941, to the date proclaimed by the Congress or the
President of the United States as the end of the war declared by the United States, both dates
inclusive; and the period of any war in which the United States may hereafter engage.  The armed
forces above referred to are the United States Army, the United States Navy, the United States
Marine Corps; and shall include any who served in the United States Coast Guard during the
period commenced December 7, 1941, and ending as aforesaid, and in any future war in which
said Guard shall be actively engaged.
     The certificate of the War Department, the Navy Department or of the United States
Veterans Administration, or of any of the successors thereof, shall be conclusive proof of service,
of honorable discharge, or of disability incurred in the line of duty during such service.
     This section of the Constitution shall be in full force and effect from the date of its
approval by the vote of the people, as provided in this Constitution; and it shall be in all respects
self enacting.

[Adopted November 7, 1944.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 063 023.0 002.0 0 CO 1876 1944 ***

Section 23. Trial by jury   grand jury. The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate in criminal
cases; but a jury in civil cases in all courts, or in criminal cases in courts not of record, may
consist of less than twelve persons, as may be prescribed by law. Hereafter a grand jury shall
consist of twelve persons, any nine of whom concurring may find an indictment; provided, the
general assembly may change, regulate or abolish the grand jury system; and provided, further,
the right of any person to serve on any jury shall not be denied or abridged on account of sex, and
the general assembly may provide by law for the exemption from jury service of persons or
classes of persons. 

[As amended November 7, 1944.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 064 008.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1946 ***

Section 8.  Elections by ballot or voting machine. All elections by the people shall be by ballot,
and in case paper ballots are required to be used, no ballots shall be marked in any way whereby
the ballot can be identified as the ballot of the person casting it. The election officers shall be
sworn or affirmed not to inquire or disclose how any elector shall have voted. In all cases of
contested election in which paper ballots are required to be used, the ballots cast may be counted
and compared with the list of voters, and examined under such safeguards and regulations as may
be provided by law. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to prevent the use of any
machine or mechanical contrivance for the purpose of receiving and registering the votes cast at
any election, provided that secrecy in voting is preserved. 

When the governing body of any county, city, city and county or town, including the city and
county of Denver, and any city, city and county or town which may be governed by the
provisions of special charter, shall adopt and purchase a voting machine, or voting machines,
such governing body may provide for the payment therefor by the issuance of interest bearing
bonds, certificates of indebtedness or other obligations, which shall be a charge upon such city,
city and county, or town; such bonds, certificates or other obligations may be made payable at
such time or times, not exceeding ten years from date of issue, as may be determined, but shall
not be issued or sold at less than par.

[As amended November 5, 1946.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 065 001.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1948 ***

Section 1. Supervision of schools   board of education. The general supervision of the public
schools of the state shall be vested in a board of education whose powers and duties shall be as
now or hereafter prescribed by law. Said board shall consist of a member from each
congressional district of the state and, if the total number of such congressional districts is an
even number, one additional member, and said members shall be elected as hereinafter provided.
The members of said board shall be elected by the qualified electors of the state, voting at general
elections, in such manner and for such terms as may be by law prescribed; provided, that
provisions may be made by law for election of a member from each congressional district of the
state by the electors of such district; and provided, further, that each member from a
congressional district of the state shall be a qualified elector of such district. If the total number
of congressional districts of the state is an even number, the additional member of said board
shall be elected from the state at large. The members of said board shall serve without
compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for any necessary expenses incurred by them in
performing their duties as members of said board. 

From and after the general election of 1948, the office of Superintendent of Public Instruction
shall be known as the office of Commissioner of Education, and from and after the expiration of
the two-year term of that office next following said general election, such commissioner shall be
appointed by said Board of Education and shall not be included in the classified civil service of
the state.

The qualifications, tenure, compensation, powers, and duties of said commissioner shall be as
prescribed by law, subject to the supervision of said board. 

[As amended November 2, 1948.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 066 002.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 2. Election of members   vacancies. (1) A general election for members of the general
assembly shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each
even numbered year, at such places in each county as now are or hereafter may be provided by
law.  Any vacancy occurring in either House by death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled in
the manner prescribed by law. The person appointed to fill the vacancy shall be a member of the
same political party, if any, as the person whose termination of membership in the general
assembly created the vacancy. 

[Amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 067 007.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 7. General assembly   shall meet when   term of members   committees. The general
assembly shall meet in regular session at 10 o' clock a.m. on the first Wednesday after the first
Tuesday of January of each year, but at such regular sessions convening in even numbered years,
the general assembly shall not enact any bills except those raising revenue, those making
appropriations, and those pertaining to subjects designated in writing by the governor during the
first 10 days of the session. The general assembly shall meet at other times when convened in
special session by the governor. The term of service of the members of the general assembly shall
begin on the convening of the first regular session of the general assembly next after their
election. The committees of the general assembly, unless otherwise provided by the general
assembly, shall expire on the convening of the first regular session after a general election.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 068 010.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 10. Each house to choose its officers.  At the beginning of the first regular session after a
general election, and at such other times as may be necessary, the Senate shall elect one of its
members president pro tempore, and the House of Representatives shall elect one of its members
as speaker. The President pro tempore and Speaker shall serve as such until the election and
installation of their respective successors. Each house shall choose its other officers and shall
judge the election and qualification of its members. 

[As amended November 7, 1950.] 
                    
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 069 019.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 19. When laws take effect   introduction of bills. An act of the general assembly shall
take effect on the date stated in the act, or, if no date is stated in the act, then on its passage. A
bill may be introduced at any time during the session unless limited by action of the general
assembly. No bill shall be introduced by title only. 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 070 022.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 22. Reading and passage of bills. Every bill shall be read by title when introduced, and at
length on two different days in each house; provided, however, any reading at length may be
dispensed with upon unanimous consent of the members present. All substantial amendments
made thereto shall be printed for the use of the members before the final vote is taken on the bill,
and no bill shall become a law except by a vote of the majority of all members elected to each
house taken on two separate days in each house, nor unless upon its final passage the vote be
taken by ayes and noes and the names of those voting be entered on the journal. 

As amended November 7, 1950.

*** MEND *** 

*** MSTART 071 027.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 27. Officers and employees   compensation. The general assembly shall prescribe by law
or by joint resolution the number, duties, and compensation of the officers and employees of each
house and of the two houses, and no payment shall be made from the state treasury, or be in any
way authorized to any person except to an acting officer or employee elected or appointed in
pursuance of law

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 072 032.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 32. Appropriation bills. The general appropriation bill shall embrace nothing but
appropriations for the expense of the executive, legislative and judicial departments of the state,
state institutions, interest on the public debt and for public schools. All other appropriations shall
be made by separate bills, each embracing but one subject. 

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 073 036.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 36. Laws on investment of trust funds. The general assembly shall, from time to time,
enact laws prescribing types or classes of investments for the investment of funds held by
executors, administrators, guardians, conservators and other trustees, whose power of investment
is not set out in the instrument creating the trust. 

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 074 046.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 46. Number of members of general assembly.  The Senate shall consist of not more than
thirty-five and the House of not more than sixty-five members.

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 075 002.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 2.  Officers. The officers of the city and county of Denver shall be such as by
appointment or election may be provided for by the charter; and the jurisdiction, term of office,
duties and qualifications of all such officers shall be such as in the charter may be provided; but
the charter shall designate the officers who shall, respectively, perform the acts and duties
required of county officers to be done by the constitution or by the general law, as far as
applicable. If any officer of said city and county of Denver shall receive any compensation
whatever, he or she shall receive the same as a stated salary, the amount of which shall be fixed
by the charter, or, in the case of officers not in the classified civil service, by ordinance within
limits fixed by the charter, and paid out of the treasury of the city and county of Denver in equal
monthly payments; provided, however, no elected officer shall receive any increase or decrease
in compensation under any ordinance passed during the term for which he was elected.

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 076 005.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1950 ***

Section 5.  New charters, amendments or measures. The citizens of the city and county of Denver
shall have the exclusive power to amend their charter or to adopt a new charter, or to adopt any
measure as herein provided; 

It shall be competent for qualified electors in number not less than five percent of the next
preceding gubernatorial vote in said city and county to petition the council for any measure, or
charter amendment, or for a charter convention. The council shall submit the same to a vote of
the
qualified electors at the next general election not held within thirty days after such petition is
filed; whenever such petition is signed by qualified electors in number not less than ten percent
of
the next preceding gubernatorial vote in said city and county, with a request for a special
election,
the council shall submit it at a special election to be held not less than thirty nor more than sixty
days from the date of filing the petition; provided, that any question so submitted at a special
election shall not again be submitted at a special election within two years thereafter. In
submitting any such charter, charter amendment or measure, any alternative article or proposition
may be presented for the choice of the voters, and may be voted on separately without prejudice
to
others. Whenever the question of a charter convention is carried by a majority of those voting
thereon, a charter convention shall be called through a special election ordinance as provided in
section four (4) hereof, and the same shall be constituted and held and the proposed charter
submitted to a vote of the qualified electors, approved or rejected, and all expenses paid, as in
said
section provided. 

The clerk of the city and county shall publish, with his official certification, for three times, a
week apart, in the official newspapers, the first publication to be with his call for the election,
general or special, the full text of any charter, charter amendment, measure, or proposal for a
charter convention, or alternative article or proposition, which is to be submitted to the voters.
Within ten days following the vote the said clerk shall publish once in said newspaper the full
text
of any charter, charter amendment, measure, or proposal for a charter convention, or alternative
article or proposition, which shall have been approved by majority of those voting thereon, and
he
shall file with the secretary of state two copies thereof (with the vote for and against) officially
certified by him, and the same shall go into effect from the date of such filing. He shall also
certify to the secretary of state, with the vote for and against, two copies of every defeated
alternative article or proposition, charter, charter amendment, measure or proposal for a charter
convention. Each charter shall also provide for a reference upon proper petition therefor, of
measures passed by the council to a vote of the qualified electors, and for the initiative by the
qualified electors of such ordinances as they may by petition request. 

The signatures to petitions in this amendment mentioned need not all be on one paper. Nothing
herein or elsewhere shall prevent the council, if it sees fit, from adopting automatic vote registers
for use at elections and references. 

No charter, charter amendment or measure adopted or defeated under the provisions of this
amendment shall be amended, repealed or revived, except by petition and electoral vote. And no
such charter, charter amendment or measure shall diminish the tax rate for state purposes fixed
by
act of the general assembly, or interfere in any wise with the collection of state taxes. 

The city council, or board of trustees, or other body in which the legislative powers of any home
rule city or town may then be vested, on its own initiative, may submit any measure, charter
amendment, or the question whether or not a charter convention shall be called, at any general or
special state or municipal election held not less than 30 days after the effective date of the
ordinance or resolution submitting such question to the voters.

[As amended November 7, 1950.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 077 018.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1952 ***

Section 18. Compensation and services of judges.  Judges of courts of record shall receive such
compensation as may be provided by law, which may be increased or decreased during their
terms
of office, and shall also receive such pension or retirement benefits as may be provided by law.
The Supreme Court shall be open except on Sundays and holidays during customary hours of the
court.  No judge of the District Court or Supreme Court shall accept nomination for any public
office other than judicial, the term of which shall begin more than 30 days before the end of his
term of office, without first resigning from his judicial office, nor shall he engage in the practice
of law, nor shall he hold office in a political party.  When called upon so to act any county judge
admitted to the practice of law in the State of Colorado may serve as district judge in any district
with full authority therein as the judge of the district wherein he serves.

[As amended November 4, 1952.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 078 031.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1952 ***

Section 31. Retirement.  Any judge of any court now existing in the State of Colorado, or
hereafter created, shall be retired from office if found permanently disabled, by reason of mental
or physical infirmities, from performing the duties of his office.  Issues concerning retirement for
disability shall be initiated by a motion of the Attorney General to the Supreme Court for
investigation concerning the permanent disability of such judge, whereupon said court may
appoint a referee who shall have authority to subpoena witnesses and make full investigation and
submit his report thereon to the court.  In the event the court shall determine such judge to be so
permanently disabled, he shall be retired with such pension or retirement benefits as he would
have received had he fully completed his term of office.  Upon such retirement his office shall be
deemed vacant and be filled as provided by law.

[Adopted November 4, 1952.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 079 008.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1954 ***

Section 8.  County officers   election   term   salary. There shall be elected in each county, at the
same time at which members of the general assembly are elected, commencing in the year
nineteen hundred and fifty four, and every four years thereafter, one county clerk, who shall be ex
officio recorder of deeds and clerk of the board of county commissioners; one sheriff; one
coroner; one treasurer who shall be collector of taxes; one county superintendent of schools; one
county surveyor; one county assessor; and one county attorney who may be elected or appointed,
as shall be provided by law; and such officers shall be paid such salary or compensation, either
from the fees, perquisites and emoluments of their respective offices, or from the general county
fund, as may be provided by law. The term of office of all such officials shall be four years, and
they shall take office on the second Tuesday in January next following their election, or at such
other time as may be provided by law. The officers herein named elected at the general election
in
1954 shall hold their respective offices until the second Tuesday of January, 1959.

[As amended November 4, 1902; November 2, 1954.]
                         
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 080 001.0 025.0 0 CO 1876 1954 ***

ARTICLE XXV
Public Utilities
In addition to the powers now vested in the General Assembly of the State of Colorado, all power
to regulate the facilities, service and rates and charges therefor, including facilities and service
and
rates and charges therefor within home rule cities and home rule towns, of every corporation,
individual, or association of individuals, wheresoever situate or operating within the State of
Colorado, whether within or without a home rule city or home rule town, as a public utility, as
presently or as may hereafter be defined as a public utility by the laws of the State of Colorado, is
hereby vested in such agency of the State of Colorado as the General Assembly shall by law
designate. 

Until such time as the General Assembly may otherwise designate, said authority shall be vested
in the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado; provided however, nothing herein
shall affect the power of municipalities to exercise reasonable police and licensing powers, nor
their power to grant franchises; and provided, further, that nothing herein shall be construed to
apply to municipally owned utilities. 

[Added November 2, 1954.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 300 000.0 025.0 0 CO 1876 1954 ***

ARTICLE XXV
Public Utilities
In addition to the powers now vested in the General Assembly of the State of Colorado, all power
to regulate the facilities, service and rates and charges therefor, including facilities and service
and
rates and charges therefor within home rule cities and home rule towns, of every corporation,
individual, or association of individuals, wheresoever situate or operating within the State of
Colorado, whether within or without a home rule city or home rule town, as a public utility, as
presently or as may hereafter be defined as a public utility by the laws of the State of Colorado, is
hereby vested in such agency of the State of Colorado as the General Assembly shall by law
designate. 

Until such time as the General Assembly may otherwise designate, said authority shall be vested
in the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Colorado; provided however, nothing herein
shall affect the power of municipalities to exercise reasonable police and licensing powers, nor
their power to grant franchises; and provided, further, that nothing herein shall be construed to
apply to municipally owned utilities. 

[Added November 2, 1954.]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 081 003.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 3.  All taxes shall be uniform upon each of the various classes of real and personal
property located within the territory of the authority levying the tax, and shall be levied, assessed,
and collected under general laws, which shall prescribe such methods and regulations as shall
secure just and equalized valuations for assessments of taxes upon all property, real and personal,
located within the territorial limits of the authority levying the tax; provided, however, that the
general assembly may, by law, exempt from taxation household furnishings and personal effects
which are not used for the production of income at any time.

Ditches, canals and flumes owned and used by individuals or corporations for irrigating land
owned by such individuals or corporations, or the individual members thereof, shall not be
separately taxed so long as they shall be owned and exclusively used for such purposes.

[As amended November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 082 002.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 2.  Moneys allocated to fund. There is hereby set aside, allocated and allotted to the old
age pension fund sums and money as follows: 

(a)  Beginning January 1, 1957, eighty five percent of all net revenue accrued or accruing,
received or receivable from any and all excise taxes now or hereafter levied upon sales at retail,
or
any other purchase transaction; together with eighty five percent of the net revenue derived from
any excise taxes now or hereafter levied upon the storage, use, or consumption of any commodity
or product; together with eighty five percent of all license fees imposed by the provisions of
sections 138 6 1 to 138 6 42, both inclusive, of Colorado Revised Statutes 1953, and
amendments thereto; provided, however, that no part of the revenue derived from excise taxes
now or hereafter levied, for highway purposes, upon gasoline or other motor fuel, shall be made a
part of said old age pension fund. 

(b)  Beginning January 1, 1957, eighty five percent of all net revenue accrued or accruing,
received or receivable from taxes of whatever kind upon all malt, vinous, or spirituous liquor,
both intoxicating and non intoxicating, and license fees connected therewith. 

(c)  All unexpended money in any fund of the state of Colorado, or political subdivision thereof,
as of January 1, 1957, which prior to said date has been allocated to the payment of an old age
pension. 

(d)  All grants in aid from the federal government for old age assistance. 

(e)  All inheritance taxes and incorporation fees appropriated under 101 2 2 to 101 2 4, both
inclusive, Colorado Revised Statutes 1953, for old age pensions. 

(f)  Such other money as may be allocated to said fund by the general assembly.

[Added November 3, 1936; as amended November 6, 1956.] 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 083 003.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 3.  Persons entitled to receive pensions. From and after January 1, 1957, every citizen of
the United States who has been a resident of the state of Colorado for such period as the general
assembly may determine, who has attained the age of sixty years or more, and who qualifies
under
the laws of Colorado to receive a pension, shall be entitled to receive the same; provided,
however, that no person otherwise qualified shall be denied a pension by reason of the fact that
he
is the owner of real estate occupied by him as a residence; nor for the reason that relatives may be
financially able to contribute to his support and maintenance; nor shall any person be denied a
pension for the reason that he owns personal property which by law is exempt from execution or
attachment; nor shall any person be required, in order to receive a pension, to repay, or promise
to
repay, the state of Colorado any money paid to him as an old age pension.

[Added November 3, 1936; as amended November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 084 004.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 4.  The state board of public welfare to administer fund. The state board of public
welfare,
or such other agency as may be authorized by law to administer old age pensions, shall cause all
moneys deposited in the old age pension fund to be paid out as directed by this article and as
required by statutory provisions not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, after defraying the
expense of administering the said fund.

[Added November 3, 1936; as amended November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 085 005.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 5.  Revenues for old age pension fund continued. The excise tax on sales at retail,
together
with all license fees levied by the provisions of sections 138 6 1 to 138 6 42, both inclusive,
Colorado Revised Statutes 1953, and amendments thereto, are hereby continued in full force and
effect beyond the date on which said taxes and license fees would otherwise expire, and shall
continue until repealed or amended; provided, however, that no law providing revenue for the old
age pension fund shall be repealed, nor shall any such law be amended so as to reduce the
revenue
provided for the old age pension fund, except in the event that at the time of such repeal or
amendment, revenue is provided for the old age pension fund in an amount at least equal to that
provided by the measure amended or repealed during the calendar year immediately preceding
the
proposed amendment or repeal.

[Added November 3, 1936; as amended November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 086 006.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 6.  Basic minimum award. (a) Beginning on the effective date of this article, every person
entitled to and receiving an old age pension from the state of Colorado under any former law or
constitutional provision shall be entitled to receive the basic minimum award hereinafter
provided
for, without being required to make a new application therefor, and such basic minimum award
shall be paid each month thereafter, so long as he remains qualified, to each person receiving an
old age pension at the time of the adoption of this article, and such basic minimum award shall
likewise be paid to each person who hereafter becomes qualified to receive an old age pension;
subject, however, to the provisions of this article relating to net income from other sources. 

(b)  From and after the effective date of this article, the basic minimum award payable to those
persons qualified to receive an old age pension shall be one hundred dollars monthly, provided,
however, that the amount of net income, from whatever source, that any person qualified to
receive a pension may have shall be deducted from the amount of the pension award unless
otherwise provided by law. 

(c)  The state board of public welfare, or such other agency as may be authorized by law to
administer old age pensions, shall have the power to adjust the basic minimum award above one
hundred dollars per month if, in its discretion, living costs have changed sufficiently to justify
that
action. 

[Added November 3, 1936; as amended November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 087 007.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 7.  Stabilization fund and health and medical care fund. (a) All the moneys deposited in
the old age pension fund shall be first available for payment of basic minimum awards to
qualified
recipients, and no part of said fund shall be transferred to any other fund until such basic
minimum awards shall have been paid. 

(b)  Any moneys remaining in the old age pension fund after full payment of such basic
minimum
awards shall be transferred to a fund to be known as the stabilization fund, which fund shall be
maintained at the amount of five million dollars, and restored to that amount after any
disbursements therefrom. The state board of public welfare, or such other agency as may be
authorized by law to administer old age pensions, shall use the moneys in such fund only to
stabilize payments of basic minimum awards. 

(c)  Any moneys remaining in the old age pension fund, after full payment of basic minimum
awards and after establishment and maintenance of the stabilization fund in the amount of five
million dollars, shall be transferred to a health and medical care fund. The state board of public
welfare, or such other agency as may be authorized by law to administer old age pensions, shall
establish and promulgate rules and regulations for administration of a program to provide health
and medical care to persons who qualify to receive old age pensions and who are not patients in
an institution for tuberculosis or mental disease; the costs of such program, not to exceed ten
million dollars in any fiscal year, shall be defrayed from such health and medical care fund;
provided, however, all moneys available, accrued or accruing, received or receivable, in said
health and medical care fund, in excess of ten million dollars in any fiscal year shall be
transferred
to the general fund of the state to be used pursuant to law.

[Added November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 088 008.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 8.  Fund to remain inviolate. All moneys deposited in the old age pension fund shall
remain inviolate for the purpose for which created, and no part thereof shall be transferred to any
other fund, or used or appropriated for any other purpose, except as provided for in this article.

[Adopted November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 089 009.0 024.0 0 CO 1876 1956 ***

Section 9.  Effective date. This article shall be in force and effect from and after January 1, 1957.

[Added November 6, 1956.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 090 002.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1958 ***

Section 2.  Lotteries Prohibited  Exceptions.  The General Assembly shall have no power to
authorize lotteries for any purposes, except that the conducting of such games of chance as
hereinafter provided shall be lawful from and after January 1, 1959.
     No game of chance shall be conducted by any person, firm, or organization, unless a
license as herein provided shall have been issued to the firm or organization conducting such
games of chance.
     The Secretary of State shall, upon application therefor on such forms as shall be prescribed
by the Secretary of State, and upon the payment of an annual fee of $50.00, issue a license for the
conducting of games of chance, to any bona-fide chartered branch or lodge or chapter of a
national
or state organization, or to any bona-fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational,
voluntary firemen's or veteran's organization, which operates without profit to its members and
which has been in existence continuously for a period of 5 years immediately prior to the making
of said application for such license, and has had during the entire 5 year period a dues-paying
membership engaged in carrying out the objects of said corporation or organization, such license
to expire at the end of each calender year in which it was issued.
     The license issued by the Secretary of State shall authorize and permit the licensee to
conduct games of chance, restricted to the selling of rights to participate and the awarding of
prizes in the specific kind of game of chance known as bingo or lotto, in which prizes are
awarded
on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols
selected at random and in the specific game of chance commonly known as raffles, conducted by
the drawing of prizes or by the allotment of prizes by chance.
     Such games of chance shall be subject to the following restrictions:

     1. The entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes
of organizations permitted to conduct such games.
     2. No person except a bona-fide member of any organization may participate in the
management or operation of any such game.
     3. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management
or operation of any such game.

     This section is self-enacting, but laws may be enacted supplementary to and in pursuance
of, but not contrary to, the provisions hereof.
     The enforcement of this Amendment shall be under such official or department of
government of the State of Colorado as the General Assembly shall provide.

[As amended November 4, 1958.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 091 008.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 8. Qualifications of justices. No person shall be eligible to the office of justice of the
supreme court unless he shall be a qualified elector of the state of Colorado and shall have been
licensed to practice law in this state for at least five years. 

[Adopted and effective November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 092 011.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 11. Qualifications of district judges. No person shall be eligible to the office of district
judge unless he shall be a qualified elector of the judicial district at the time of his election or
selection and shall have been licensed to practice law in this state for five years. Each judge of
the
district court shall be a resident of his district during his term of office. 

[Adopted and effective November 6, 1962.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 093 014.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 14. Probate court   jurisdiction   judges   election   term   qualifications. The probate
court of the city and county of Denver shall have such jurisdiction as provided by section 9,
subsection (3) of this article. The judge of the probate court of the city and county of Denver
shall
have the same qualifications and term of office as provided in this article for district judges and
shall be elected initially by the qualified electors of the city and county of Denver at the general
election in the year 1964. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in section 20 of this article. The
number of judges of the probate court of the city and county of Denver may be increased as
provided by law. 

[Adopted and effective November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 094 016.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 16. 
[Repealed November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 095 015.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 15. Juvenile court   jurisdiction   judges   election   term   qualifications. The juvenile
court of the city and county of Denver shall have such jurisdiction as shall be provided by law.
The judge of the juvenile court of the city and county of Denver shall have the same
qualifications
and term of office as provided in this article for district judges and shall be elected initially by the
qualified electors of the city and county of Denver at the general election in the year 1964.
Vacancies shall be filled as provided in section 20 of this article. The number of judges of the
juvenile court of the city and county of Denver may be increased as provided by law. 

[Adopted and effective November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 096 001.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 1.  Qualifications of elector. Every citizen of the United States who has attained the age
of
twenty-one years, has resided in this state not less than one year next preceding the election at
which he offers to vote and in the county, city, town, ward, or precinct such time as may be
prescribed by law, and has been duly registered as a voter if required by law shall be qualified to
vote at all elections; except that the general assembly may by law extend to citizens of the United
States who have resided in this state less than one year the right to vote for presidential and
vice presidential electors.

[As amended November 4, 1902; November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 097 019.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1962 ***

Section 19.  State income tax laws by reference to United States tax laws. The general assembly
may by law define the income upon which income taxes may be levied under section 17 of this
article by reference to provisions of the laws of the United States in effect from time to time,
whether retrospective or prospective in their operation, and shall in any such law provide the
dollar amount of personal exemptions to be allowed to the taxpayer as a deduction. The general
assembly may in any such law provide for other exceptions or modifications to any of such
provisions of the laws of the United States and for retrospective exceptions or modifications to
those provisions which are retrospective.

[Adopted November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 098 015.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1963 ***

Section 15.  Boards of equalization   duties   property tax administrator.  (a)  There shall be in
each county of the state a county board of equalization, consisting of the board of county
commissioners of said county. As may be prescribed by law, the county boards of equalization
shall raise, lower, adjust, and equalize valuations for assessment of taxes upon real and personal
property located within their respective counties, subject to review and revision by the state
board
of equalization. 

(b)  There shall be a state board of equalization, consisting of the governor, state auditor, state
treasurer, secretary of state and attorney general.  As may be prescribed by law, the state board of
equalization shall review the valuations determined for assessment of taxes upon the various
classes of real and personal property located in the several counties of the state and shall raise,
lower, and adjust the same, to the end that all valuations for assessment of taxes shall be just and
equalized; provided, however, that said state board of equalization shall have no power of
original
assessment.

(c)  The state board of equalization and the county boards of equalization shall perform such
other
duties as may be prescribed by law. 

[As amended November 3, 1914; November 6, 1962.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 099 004.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1964 ***

Section 4. Qualifications of state officers. No person shall be eligible to the office of governor or
lieutenant governor unless he shall have attained the age of thirty years, nor to the office of
secretary of state or state treasurer unless he shall have attained the age of twenty five years, nor
to the office of attorney general unless he shall have attained the age of twenty five years and be a
licensed attorney of the supreme court of the state in good standing, and no person shall be
eligible to any one of said offices unless, in addition to the qualifications above prescribed
therefor, he shall be a citizen of the United States, and have resided within the limits of the state
two years next preceding his election. 

[As amended November 3, 1964.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 100 006.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1964 ***

Section 6.  County superintendent of schools. There may be a county superintendent of schools in
each county, whose term of office shall be four years, and whose duties, qualifications, and
compensation shall be prescribed by law. 

The provisions of section 8 of article XIV of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, the
office of county superintendent of schools may be abolished by any county if the question of the
abolishment of said office is first submitted, at a general election, to a vote of the qualified
electors of said county and approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon. In any county so
voting in favor of such abolishment, the office of county superintendent of schools and the term
of
office of any incumbent in said county shall terminate on June 30 following.

[As amended November 3, 1964.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 101 001.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 1. Vestment of judicial power. The judicial power of the state shall be vested in a
supreme
court, district courts, a probate court in the city and county of Denver, a juvenile court in the city
and county of Denver, county courts, and such other courts or judicial officers with jurisdiction
inferior to the supreme court, as the general assembly may, from time to time establish; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict or diminish the powers of
home rule cities and towns granted under article XX, section 6 of this constitution to create
municipal and police courts. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]  

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 102 002.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 2. Appellate jurisdiction. (1) The supreme court, except as otherwise provided in this
constitution, shall have appellate jurisdiction only, which shall be coextensive with the state, and
shall have a general superintending control over all inferior courts, under such regulations and
limitations as may be prescribed by law. 

(2) Appellate review by the supreme court of every final judgment of the district courts, the
probate court of the city and county of Denver, and the juvenile court of the city and county of
Denver shall be allowed, and the supreme court shall have such other appellate review as may be
provided by law. There shall be no appellate review by the district court of any final judgment of
the probate court of the city and county of Denver or of the juvenile court of the city and county
of
Denver. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 103 002.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 2. Appellate jurisdiction. (1) The supreme court, except as otherwise provided in this
constitution, shall have appellate jurisdiction only, which shall be coextensive with the state, and
shall have a general superintending control over all inferior courts, under such regulations and
limitations as may be prescribed by law. 

(2) Appellate review by the supreme court of every final judgment of the district courts, the
probate court of the city and county of Denver, and the juvenile court of the city and county of
Denver shall be allowed, and the supreme court shall have such other appellate review as may be
provided by law. There shall be no appellate review by the district court of any final judgment of
the probate court of the city and county of Denver or of the juvenile court of the city and county
of
Denver. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 104 003.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 3. Original jurisdiction   opinions. The supreme court shall have power to issue writs of
habeas corpus, mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari, injunction, and such other original and
remedial writs as may be provided by rule of court with authority to hear and determine the same;
and each judge of the supreme court shall have like power and authority as to writs of habeas
corpus. The supreme court shall give its opinion upon important questions upon solemn
occasions
when required by the governor, the senate, or the house of representatives; and all such opinions
shall be published in connection with the reported decision of said court. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 105 004.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 4. Terms. At least two terms of the supreme court shall be held each year, at the seat of
government. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 106 005.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 5. Personnel of court   departments   chief justice. (1) The supreme court shall consist of
not less than seven justices, who may sit en banc or in departments. In case said court shall sit in
departments, each of said departments shall have full power and authority of said court in the
determination of causes, the issuing of writs and the exercise of all powers authorized by this
constitution, or provided by law, subject to the general control of the court sitting en banc, and
such rules and regulations as the court may make, but no decision of any department shall
become
judgment of the court unless concurred in by at least three justices, and no case involving
construction of the constitution of this state or of the United States shall be decided except by the
court en banc. Upon request of the supreme court, the number of justices may be increased to no
more than nine members whenever two thirds of the members of each house of the general
assembly concur therein. 

(2) The supreme court shall select a chief justice to serve at the pleasure of a majority of the
court,
who shall be the executive head of the judicial system. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 107 007.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 7. [Repealed January 12, 1965.] 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 108 009.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 9. District courts   jurisdiction. (1) The district courts shall be trial courts of record with
general jurisdiction, and shall have original jurisdiction in all civil, probate, and criminal cases,
except as otherwise provided herein, and shall have such appellate jurisdiction as may be
prescribed by law. 

(2) Effective the second Tuesday in January, 1965, all causes pending before the county court in
each county, except those causes within the jurisdiction of the county court as provided by law,
and except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, shall then be transferred to and pending
in
the district court of such county, and no bond or obligation given in any of said causes shall be
affected by said transfer. 

(3) In the city and county of Denver, exclusive original jurisdiction in all matters of probate,
settlements of estates of deceased persons, appointment of guardians, conservators and
administrators, and settlement of their accounts, the adjudication of the mentally ill, and such
other jurisdiction as may be provided by law shall be vested in a probate court, created by section
1 of this article, and to which court all of such jurisdiction of the county court of the city and
county of Denver shall be transferred, including all pending cases and matters, effective on the
second Tuesday of January, 1965. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 109 010.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 10.  Judicial districts  district judges  (1) The state shall be divided into judicial districts. 
Such districts shall be formed of compact territory and be bounded by county lines.  The judicial
districts as provided by law on the effective date of this amendment shall constitute the judicial
districts of the state until changed.  The general assembly may by law, whenever two-thirds of the
members of each house concur therein, change the boundaries of any district or increase or
diminish the number of judicial districts.
     (2) The number of district judges provided by law for each district on the effective date of
this amendment shall constitute the number of judges for the district until changed. The general
assembly may by law, whenever two thirds of the members of each house concur therein,
increase
or diminish the number of district judges, except that the office of a district judge may not be
abolished until completion of the term for which he was elected or appointed, but he may be
required to serve in a judicial district other than the one for which elected, as long as such district
encompasses his county of residence. 
     (3) Separate divisions of district courts may be established in districts by law, or in the
absence of any such law, by rule of court. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 110 012.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 12. Terms of court. The time of holding courts within the judicial districts shall be as
provided by rule of court, but at least one term of the district court shall be held annually in each
county. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 111 013.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 13. District attorneys   election   term   salary   qualifications. In each judicial district
there shall be a district attorney elected by the electors thereof, whose term of office shall be four
years. District attorneys shall receive such salaries and perform such duties as provided by law.
No person shall be eligible to the office of district attorney who shall not, at the time of his
election possess all the qualifications of district court judges as provided in this article. All
district
attorneys holding office on the effective date of this amendment shall continue in office for the
remainder of the respective terms for which they were elected or appointed. 

[Adopted November 12, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 112 017.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 17. County courts   jurisdiction   appeals. County courts shall have such civil, criminal,
and appellate jurisdiction as may be provided by law, provided such courts shall not have
jurisdiction of felonies or in civil cases where the boundaries or title to real property shall be in
question. Appellate review by the supreme court or the district courts of every final judgment of
the county courts shall be as provided by law. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 113 019.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 19. Laws relating to courts   uniform. All laws relating to state courts shall be general
and
of uniform operation throughout the state, and except as hereafter in this section specified the
organization, jurisdiction, powers, proceedings, and practice of all courts of the same class, and
the force and effect of the proceedings, judgments and decrees of such courts severally shall be
uniform. County courts may be classified or graded as may be provided by law, and the
organization, jurisdiction, powers, proceedings, and practice of county courts within the same
class or grade, and the force and effect of the proceedings, judgments and decrees of county
courts
in the same class or grade shall be uniform; provided, however, that the organization and
administration of the county court of the city and county of Denver shall be as provided in the
charter and ordinances of the city and county of Denver. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 114 045.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1966 ***

Section 45. General assembly. The general assembly shall consist of not more than thirty five
members of the senate and of not more than sixty five members of the house of representatives,
one to be elected from each senatorial and each representative district, respectively. 

[As amended November 8, 1966.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 115 021.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 21. Rule making power. The supreme court shall make and promulgate rules governing
the administration of all courts and shall make and promulgate rules governing practice and
procedure in civil and criminal cases, except that the general assembly shall have the power to
provide simplified procedures in county courts for claims not exceeding five hundred dollars and
for the trial of misdemeanors. 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 116 022.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 22. Process   prosecution   in name of people. In all prosecutions for violations of the
laws of Colorado, process shall run in the name of "The People of the State of Colorado"; all
prosecutions shall be carried on in the name and by the authority of "The People of the State of
Colorado", and conclude, "against the peace and dignity of the same". 

[Adopted November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 117 011.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1965 ***

Section 11.  Justices of the peace   constables.

[Repealed November 6, 1962    Effective January 12, 1965.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 118 046.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1966 ***

Section 46. Senatorial and representative districts. The state shall be divided into as many
senatorial and representative districts as there are members of the senate and house of
representatives respectively, each district in each house having a population as nearly equal as
may be, as required by the constitution of the United States, but in no event shall there be more
than five percent deviation between the most populous and the least populous district in each
house. 

[As amended November 8, 1966]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 119 047.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1966 ***

Section 47. Composition of districts.  Each district shall be as compact in area as possible and the
aggregate linear distance of all district boundaries shall be as short as possible. Each district shall
consist of contiguous whole general election precincts. Districts of the same house shall not
overlap.  Except when necessary to meet the equal population requirements of section 46, no part
of one county shall be added to all or part of another county in forming districts.  When county,
city, or town boundaries are changed, adjustments, if any, in legislative districts shall be as
prescribed by law. 

[As amended November 8, 1966.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 120 048.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1966 ***

Section 48. Revision and alteration of districts   (1) In the regular session of the General
Assembly in 1967 and at such session next following official publication of each federal
enumeration of the population of the state, the General Assembly shall establish or revise and
alter
the boundaries of senatorial and representative districts according to the provisions of sections 46
and 47.  After forty-five days from the beginning of each regular session, no member of the
General Assembly shall be entitled to or earn any compensation for his services or receive any
payment for salary or expenses, nor shall any member be eligible to succeed himself in office,
unless and until such revision has been made.

(2) Each paragraph, sentence and clause of sections 45, 46, 47, and 48 shall be deemed to be
severable from all other parts thereof and shall be interpreted to preserve, as the primary purpose
thereof, the creation of single member districts.  Nothing in said sections contained, nor any
judgement or judicial declaration pertaining to sections hereby repealed, nor the failure of the
State of Colorado to conduct a census in 1885 and subsequent years, shall affect the validity of
laws at any time enacted by the General Assembly or by the people on any subject not directly
pertaining to legislative districting or apportionment.

[As amended November 8, 1966.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 121 003.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 3. State officers   election   returns. The officers named in section one of this article shall
be chosen on the day of the general election, by the qualified electors of the state. The governor
and the lieutenant governor shall be chosen jointly by the casting by each voter of a single vote
applicable to both offices. The returns of every election for said officers shall be sealed up and
transmitted to the secretary of state, directed to the speaker of the house of representatives, who
shall immediately, upon the organization of the house, and before proceeding to other business,
open and publish the same in the presence of a majority of the members of both houses of the
general assembly, who shall for that purpose assemble in the house of representatives. The joint
candidates having the highest number of votes cast for governor and lieutenant governor, and the
person having the highest number of votes for any other office, shall be declared duly elected, but
if two or more have an equal and the highest number of votes for the same office or offices, one
of
them, or any two for whom joint votes were cast for governor and lieutenant governor
respectively, shall be chosen thereto by the two houses, on joint ballot. Contested elections for
the
said offices shall be determined by the two houses, on joint ballot, in such manner as may be
prescribed by law. 

[As amended 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 122 005.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 5. Personnel of court   departments   chief justice. (1) The supreme court shall consist of
not less than seven justices, who may sit en banc or in departments. In case said court shall sit in
departments, each of said departments shall have full power and authority of said court in the
determination of causes, the issuing of writs and the exercise of all powers authorized by this
constitution, or provided by law, subject to the general control of the court sitting en banc, and
such rules and regulations as the court may make, but no decision of any department shall
become
judgment of the court unless concurred in by at least three justices, and no case involving
construction of the constitution of this state or of the United States shall be decided except by the
court en banc. Upon request of the supreme court, the number of justices may be increased to no
more than nine members whenever two thirds of the members of each house of the general
assembly concur therein. 

(2) The supreme court shall select a chief justice from its own membership to serve at the
pleasure
of a majority of the court, who shall be the executive head of the judicial system. 

(3) The supreme court shall appoint a court administrator and such other personnel as the court
may deem necessary to aid the administration of the courts. Whenever the chief justice deems
assignment of a judge necessary to the prompt disposition of judicial business, he may: (a)
Assign
any county judge, or retired county judge who consents, temporarily to perform judicial duties in
any county court if otherwise qualified under section 18 of this article, or assign, as hereafter may
be authorized by law, said judge to any other court; or (b) assign any district, probate, or juvenile
judge, or retired justice or district, probate, or juvenile judge who consents, temporarily to
perform judicial duties in any court. For each day of such temporary service a retired justice or
judge shall receive compensation in an amount equal to 1/20 of the monthly salary then currently
applicable to the judicial position in which the temporary service is rendered. 

(4) The chief justice shall appoint from the district judges of each judicial district a chief judge to
serve at the pleasure of the chief justice. A chief judge shall receive no additional salary by
reason
of holding such position. Each chief judge shall have and exercise such administrative powers
over all judges of all courts within his district as may be delegated to him by the chief justice. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 123 006.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

 Section 6. Election of judges. 

[Repealed November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 124 007.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 7. Term of office. The full term of office of justices of the supreme court shall be ten
years. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 125 010.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 10. Judicial districts   district judges. (1) The state shall be divided into judicial districts.
Such districts shall be formed of compact territory and be bounded by county lines. The judicial
districts as provided by law on the effective date of this amendment shall constitute the judicial
districts of the state until changed. The general assembly may by law, whenever two thirds of the
members of each house concur therein, change the boundaries of any district or increase or
diminish the number of judicial districts. 

(2) In each judicial district there shall be one or more judges of the district court. The full term of
office of a district judge shall be six years. 

(3) The number of district judges provided by law for each district on the effective date of this
amendment shall constitute the number of judges for the district until changed. The general
assembly may by law, whenever two thirds of the members of each house concur therein,
increase
or diminish the number of district judges, except that the office of a district judge may not be
abolished until completion of the term for which he was elected or appointed, but he may be
required to serve in a judicial district other than the one for which elected, as long as such district
encompasses his county of residence. 

(4) Separate divisions of district courts may be established in districts by law, or in the absence of
any such law, by rule of court. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 126 016.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 16. County judges   terms   qualifications. In each county there shall be one or more
judges of the county court as may be provided by law, whose full term of office shall be four
years, and whose qualifications shall be prescribed by law. County judges shall be qualified
electors of their counties at the time of their election or appointment. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 127 018.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 18. Compensation and services. Justices and judges of courts of record shall receive such
compensation as may be provided by law, which may be increased but may not be decreased
during their term of office and shall receive such pension or retirement benefits as may be
provided by law. No justice or judge of a court of record shall accept designation or nomination
for any public office other than judicial without first resigning from his judicial office, nor shall
he
hold at any other time any other public office during his term of office, nor hold office in any
political party organization, nor contribute to or campaign for any political party or candidate for
political office. No supreme court justice, judge of any intermediate appellate court, district court
judge, probate judge, or juvenile judge shall engage in the practice of law. Justices, district
judges,
probate judges, and juvenile judges when called upon to do so, may serve in any state court with
full authority as provided by law. Any county judge may serve in any other county court, or
serve,
as hereinafter may be authorized by law, in any other court, if possessing the qualifications
prescribed by law for a judge of such county court, or other court, or as a municipal judge or
police magistrate as provided by law, or in the case of home rule cities as provided by charter and
ordinances. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 128 023.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 23. Retirement and removal of justices and judges  (1) On attaining the age of seventy-
two a justice or judge of the court of record shall retire and his judicial office shall be vacant
except as otherwise provided in section 20 (2).  
     (2) Whenever a justice or judge of any court of this state has been convicted in any court
of this state or of the United States or of any state of a felony or other offense involving moral
turpitude, the supreme court shall, of its own motion or upon petition filed by any person, and
upon finding that such a conviction was had, enter its order suspending said justice or judge from
office until such time as said judgement of conviction becomes final and the payment of salary of
said justice or judge shall also be suspended from the date of such order.  If said judgement of
conviction becomes final, the supreme court shall enter its order removing said justice or judge
from office and declaring his office vacant and his right to salary shall cease from the date of the
order of his suspension.  If said judgement of conviction is reversed with directions to enter a
judgement of acquittal or if reversed for a new trial which subsequently results in a judgement of
dismissal or acquittal, the supreme court shall enter its order terminating the suspension of said
justice or judge and said justice or judge shall be entitled to his salary for the period of
suspension.  A plea of guilty or nolo contendere to such charge shall be equivalent to a final
conviction for the purpose of this section.
     (3)  (a) There shall be a commission on judicial qualifications.  It shall consist of: (i)
Three judges of district courts and two judges of country courts, each selected by the supreme
court for a four-year term; (ii) Two citizens admitted to practice law in the courts of this state,
none of whom shall be a justice or a judge, who shall have practiced in this state for at least 10
years, and who shall be appointed by a majority action of the governor, the attorney general, and
the chief justice for a four-year term; and (iii) Two citizens, none of whom shall be a justice or a
judge, active or retired, nor admitted to practice law in the courts of this state, who shall be
appointed by the governor for a four-year term.  Whenever a member selected under subdivision
(i) ceases to be a member of the commission or judge of the court from which he was selected,
his
membership shall forthwith terminate and the supreme court shall select a successor for a four-
year term; and whenever a member selected under subdivision (ii) ceases to be a member of the
commission or ceases to be an attorney admitted to practice law in the courts of this state or
becomes a justice or judge of any court of record his membership shall forthwith terminate and
the governor, the attorney general, and the chief justice, by majority action, shall appoint a
successor for a four-year term; and  whenever a member selected under subdivision (iii) ceases to
be a member of the commission or becomes a justice or judge of any court of record or an
attorney
admitted to practice law in the courts of this state, his membership shall forthwith terminate and
the governor shall appoint a successor for a four-year term.  No member of the commission shall
receive any compensation for his services as such, but shall be allowed his necessary expenses
for
travel, board and lodging and any other expenses occurred in the performance of his duties as
such, to be paid by the supreme court from its budget to be appropriated by the general assembly.
     (b) A justice or judge of any court of record of this state, in accordance with the procedure
set forth below, may be removed for willful misconduct in office, or willful and persistent failure
to perform his duties or intemperance, or he may be retired for disability interfering with the
performance of his duties which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character.  The
commission on judicial qualifications may, after such investigation as the commission deems
necessary, order a hearing to be held before it concerning the removal or retirement of a justice or
judge, or the commission may in its discretion ask the supreme court to appoint three special
masters, who shall be justices or judges of courts of record to hear and take evidence in any such
matter and to report thereon to the commission.  If, after hearing, or after considering the record
and report of the masters, the commission finds good cause therefor it shall recommend to the
supreme court the removal or retirement, as the case may be, of the justice or judge.
     (c) The supreme court shall review the record of the proceedings on the law and facts and
in its discretion may permit the introduction of additional evidence and shall order removal or
retirement as it finds just and proper, or wholly reject the recommendation.  Upon an order for
retirement, the justice or judge shall thereby be retired with the same rights and privileges as if he
retired pursuant to statute.  Upon an order for removal, the justice or judge shall thereby be
removed from office and his salary shall cease from the date of such order.  On the entry of an
order for retirement or for removal, his office shall be deemed vacant.
     (d) All papers filed with and proceedings before the commission on judicial qualifications
or masters appointed by the supreme court, pursuant to this section, shall be confidential, and the
filing of papers with and the giving of testimony before the commission or the masters shall be
privileged; but no other publication of such papers or proceedings shall be privileged in any
action
for defamation except that (i) The record filed by the commission in the supreme court continues
privileged and upon such filing loses its confidential character and (ii) A writing which was
privileged prior to its filing with the commission or the masters does not lose such privilege by
such filing.  The supreme court shall by rule provide for procedure under this section before the
commission on judicial qualifications, the masters, and the supreme court.  A justice or judge
who
is a member of the commission or supreme court shall not participate in any proceedings
involving his own removal or retirement.
     (e) Nothing herein contain shall be construed to have any effect on article XIII of this
constitution.

[Amended November 8, 1966  effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 129 024.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 24. Judicial nominating commissions. (1) There shall be one judicial nominating
commission for the supreme court and any intermediate appellate court to be called the supreme
court nominating commission and one judicial nominating commission for each judicial district
in
the state. 

(2) The supreme court nominating commission shall consist of the chief justice or acting chief
justice of the supreme court, ex officio, who shall act as chairman and shall have no vote, one
citizen admitted to practice law before the courts of this state and one other citizen not admitted
to
practice law in the courts of this state residing in each congressional district in the state, and one
additional citizen not admitted to practice law in the courts of this state. No more than one half of
the commission members plus one, exclusive of the chief justice, shall be members of the same
political party. Three voting members shall serve until December 31, 1967, three until December
31, 1969, and three until December 31, 1971. Thereafter each voting member appointed shall
serve until the 31st of December of the 6th year following the date of his appointment. 

(3) Each judicial district nominating commission shall consist of a justice of the supreme court
designated by the chief justice, to serve at the will of the chief justice who shall act as chairman
ex
officio, and shall have no vote, and seven citizens residing in that judicial district, no more than
four of whom shall be members of the same political party and there shall be at least one voting
member from each county in the district. In all judicial districts having a population of more than
35,000 inhabitants as determined by the last preceding census taken under the authority of the
United States, the voting members shall consist of three persons admitted to practice law in the
courts of this state and four persons not admitted to practice law in the courts of this state. In
judicial districts having a population of 35,000 inhabitants or less as determined above, at least
four voting members shall be persons not admitted to practice law in the courts of this state; and
it
shall be determined by majority vote of the governor, the attorney general and the chief justice,
how many, if any, of the remaining three members shall be persons admitted to practice law in
the
courts of this state. Two voting members shall serve until December 31, 1967, two until
December 31, 1969, and three until December 31, 1971. Thereafter each voting member
appointed shall serve until the 31st of December of the 6th year following the date of his
appointment. 

(4) Members of each judicial nominating commission selected by reason of their being citizens
admitted to practice law in the courts of this state shall be appointed by majority action of the
governor, the attorney general and the chief justice. All other members shall be appointed by the
governor. No voting member of a judicial nominating commission shall hold any elective and
salaried United States or state public office or any elective political party office and he shall not
be eligible for reappointment to succeed himself on a commission. No voting member of the
supreme court nominating commission shall be eligible for appointment as a justice of the
supreme court or any intermediate appellate court so long as he is a member of that commission
and for a period of three years thereafter; and no voting member of a judicial district nominating
commission shall be eligible for appointment to judicial office in that district while a member of
that commission and for a period of one year thereafter. 

[Adopted November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.] 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 130 025.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 25. Election of justices and judges. A justice of the supreme court or a judge of any other
court of record, who shall desire to retain his judicial office for another term after the expiration
of
his then term of office shall file with the secretary of state, not more than six months nor less
than
three months prior to the general election next prior to the expiration of his then term of office, a
declaration of his intent to run for another term. Failure to file such a declaration within the time
specified shall create a vacancy in that office at the end of his then term of office. Upon the filing
of such a declaration, a question shall be placed on the appropriate ballot at such general election,
as follows: 

"Shall Justice (Judge) .... of the Supreme (or other) Court be retained in office? YES/..../NO/..../."
If a majority of those voting on the question vote "Yes", the justice or judge is thereupon elected
to a succeeding full term. If a majority of those voting on the question vote "No", this will cause
a
vacancy to exist in that office at the end of his then present term of office. 

In the case of a justice of the supreme court or any intermediate appellate court, the electors of
the
state at large; in the case of a judge of a district court, the electors of that judicial district; and in
the case of a judge of the county court or other court of record, the electors of that county; shall
vote on the question of retention in office of the justice or judge. 

[Adopted November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 131 026.0 006.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 26. Denver county judges. The provisions of sections 16, 20, 23, 24 and 25 hereof shall
not be applicable to judges of the county court of the City and County of Denver. The number,
manner of selection, qualifications, term of office, tenure, and removal of such judges shall be as
provided in the charter and ordinances of the City and County of Denver. 

[Adopted November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 132 006.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 6.  Self-propelled equipment, motor vehicles, and certain other movable equipment.  The
general assembly shall enact laws classifying motor vehicles and also wheeled trailers,
semitrailers, trailer coaches and mobile homes, and mobile and self propelled construction
equipment, prescribing methods of determining the taxable value of such property, and requiring
payment of a graduated annual specific ownership tax thereon, which tax shall be in lieu of all ad
valorem taxes upon such property; provided, that such laws shall not exempt from ad valorem
taxation any such property in process of manufacture or held in storage, or which constitutes the
inventory of manufacturers or distributors thereof or dealers therein. 

Such graduated annual specific ownership tax shall be in addition to any state registration or
license fees imposed on such property, shall be payable to a designated county officer at the same
time as any such registration or license fees are payable, and shall be apportioned, distributed,
and
paid over to the political subdivisions of the state in such manner as may be prescribed by law. 

All laws exempting from taxation property other than that specified in this article shall be void. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 133 006.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1967 ***

Section 6.  Self-propelled equipment, motor vehicles, and certain other movable equipment.  The
general assembly shall enact laws classifying motor vehicles and also wheeled trailers,
semitrailers, trailer coaches and mobile homes, and mobile and self propelled construction
equipment, prescribing methods of determining the taxable value of such property, and requiring
payment of a graduated annual specific ownership tax thereon, which tax shall be in lieu of all ad
valorem taxes upon such property; provided, that such laws shall not exempt from ad valorem
taxation any such property in process of manufacture or held in storage, or which constitutes the
inventory of manufacturers or distributors thereof or dealers therein. 

Such graduated annual specific ownership tax shall be in addition to any state registration or
license fees imposed on such property, shall be payable to a designated county officer at the same
time as any such registration or license fees are payable, and shall be apportioned, distributed,
and
paid over to the political subdivisions of the state in such manner as may be prescribed by law. 

All laws exempting from taxation property other than that specified in this article shall be void. 

[As amended November 8, 1966    Effective January 17, 1967.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 134 007.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1968 ***

Section 7.  Officers compensation.

[Repealed November 5, 1968.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 135 015.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1968 ***

Section 15.  Compensation and fees of county officers. The general assembly shall fix the
compensation of county officers in this state by law, and shall establish scales of fees to be
charged and collected by such county officers. All such fees shall be paid into the county general
fund. 

When fixing the compensation of county officers, the general assembly shall give due
consideration to county variations, including population; the number of persons residing in
unincorporated areas; assessed valuation; motor vehicle registrations; building permits; military
installations; and such other factors as may be necessary to prepare compensation schedules that
reflect variations in the workloads and responsibilities of county officers and in the tax resources
of the several counties. 

The compensation of any county officer shall be increased or decreased only when the
compensation of all county officers within the same county, or when the compensation for the
same county officer within the several counties of the state, is increased or decreased. 

Except for the schedule of increased compensation for county officers enacted by the general
assembly to become effective on January 1, 1969, county officers shall not thereafter have their
compensation increased or decreased during the terms of office to which they have been elected
or
appointed.

[Repealed and reenacted November 5, 1968.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 136 022.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1970 ***

Section 22. Principal departments. All executive and administrative offices, agencies, and
instrumentalities of the executive department of state government and their respective functions,
powers, and duties, except for the office of governor and lieutenant governor, shall be allocated
by law among and within not more than twenty departments by no later than June 30, 1968.
Subsequently, all new powers or functions shall be assigned to departments, divisions, sections,
or
units in such manner as will tend to provide an orderly arrangement in the administrative
organization of state government. Temporary commissions may be established by law and need
not be allocated within a principal department. Nothing in this section shall supersede the
provisions of section 13, article XII, of this constitution, except that the classified civil service of
the state shall not extend to heads of principal departments established pursuant to this section. 

[As amended November 3, 1970    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, December 7,
1970.] 
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 137 001.A 007.0 0 CO 1876 1970 ***

Section 1a.  Qualifications of elector   residence on federal land. Any other provision of this
constitution with regard to "qualifications of electors" notwithstanding, every citizen of the
United States who shall be otherwise qualified and shall have resided in this state not less than
three
months next preceding the election at which he offers to vote, and in the county or precinct such
time as may be prescribed by law, shall be qualified to vote at all elections; provided, that the
general assembly may by law extend to citizens of the United States who have resided in this
state
less than three months, the right to vote for presidential and vice presidential electors, United
States senators, and United States representatives. 

Any person who otherwise meets the requirements of law for voting in this state shall not be
denied the right to vote in an election because of residence on land situated within this state that
is
under the jurisdiction of the United States.
     
[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, December 7,
1970.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 138 013.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1971 ***

Section 13.  Personnel system of state   merit system. (1) Appointments and promotions to
offices
and employments in the personnel system of the state shall be made according to merit and
fitness, to be ascertained by competitive tests of competence without regard to race, creed, or
color, or political affiliation.

(2)  The personnel system of the state shall comprise all appointive public officers and employees
of the state, except the following: Members of the public utilities commission, the industrial
commission of Colorado, the state board of land commissioners, the Colorado tax commission,
the state parole board, and the state personnel board; members of any board or commission
serving without compensation except for per diem allowances provided by law and
reimbursement of expenses; the employees in the offices of the governor and the lieutenant
governor whose functions are confined to such offices and whose duties are concerned only with
the administration thereof; appointees to fill vacancies in elective offices; one deputy of each
elective officer other than the governor and lieutenant governor specified in section 1 of article
IV
of this constitution; officers otherwise specified in this constitution; faculty members of
educational institutions and departments not reformatory or charitable in character, and such
administrators thereof as may be exempt by law; students and inmates in state educational or
other
institutions employed therein; attorneys at law serving as assistant attorneys general; and
members, officers, and employees of the legislative and judicial departments of the state, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this constitution.

(3)  Officers and employees within the judicial department, other than judges and justices, may
be
included within the personnel system of the state upon determination by the supreme court,
sitting
en banc, that such would be in the best interests of the state. 

(4)  Where authorized by law, any political subdivision of this state may contract with the state
personnel board for personnel services. 

(5)  The person to be appointed to any position under the personnel system shall be one of the
three persons ranking highest on the eligible list for such position, or such lesser number as
qualify, as determined from competitive tests of competence, subject to limitations set forth in
rules of the state personnel board applicable to multiple appointments from any such list. 

(6)  All appointees shall reside in the state, but applications need not be limited to residents of the
state as to those positions found by the state personnel board to require special education or
training or special professional or technical qualifications and which cannot be readily filled from
among residents of this state. 

(7)  The head of each principal department shall be the appointing authority for the employees of
his office and for heads of divisions, within the personnel system, ranking next below the head of
such department. Heads of such divisions shall be the appointing authorities for all positions in
the personnel system within their respective divisions. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to affect the supreme executive powers of the governor prescribed in section 2 of
article
IV of this constitution. 

(8)  Persons in the personnel system of the state shall hold their respective positions during
efficient service or until reaching retirement age, as provided by law. They shall be graded and
compensated according to standards of efficient service which shall be the same for all persons
having like duties. A person certified to any class or position in the personnel system may be
dismissed, suspended, or otherwise disciplined by the appointing authority upon written findings
of failure to comply with standards of efficient service or competence, or for willful misconduct,
willful failure or inability to perform his duties, or final conviction of a felony or any other
offense
which involves moral turpitude, or written charges thereof may be filed by any person with the
appointing authority, which shall be promptly determined. Any action of the appointing authority
taken under this subsection shall be subject to appeal to the state personnel board, with the right
to
be heard thereby in person or by counsel, or both. 

(9)  The state personnel director may authorize the temporary employment of persons, not to
exceed six months, during which time an eligible list shall be provided for permanent positions.
No other temporary or emergency employment shall be permitted under the personnel system. 

(10)  The state personnel board shall establish probationary periods for all persons initially
appointed, but not to exceed twelve months for any class or position. After satisfactory
completion of any such period, the person shall be certified to such class or position within the
personnel system, but unsatisfactory performance shall be grounds for dismissal by the
appointing
authority during such period without right of appeal. 

(11)  Persons certified to classes and positions under the classified civil service of the state
immediately prior to July 1, 1971, persons having served for six months or more as provisional
or
acting provisional employees in such positions immediately prior to such date, and all persons
having served six months or more in positions not within the classified civil service immediately
prior to such date but included in the personnel system by this section, shall be certified to
comparable positions, and grades and classifications, under the personnel system, and shall not
be
subject to probationary periods of employment. All other persons in positions under the
personnel
system shall be subject to the provisions of this section concerning initial appointment on or after
such date.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 3, 1970    Effective July 1, 1971.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 139 014.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1971 ***

Section 14.  State personnel board   state personnel director. (1) There is hereby created a state
personnel board to consist of five members, three of whom shall be appointed by the governor
with the consent of the senate, and two of whom shall be elected by persons certified to classes
and positions in the state personnel system in the manner prescribed by law. Each member shall
be appointed or elected for a term of five years, and may succeed himself, but of the members
first
selected, the members appointed by the governor shall serve for terms of one, two, and three
years, respectively, and the members elected shall serve for terms of four and five years,
respectively. Each member of the board shall be a qualified elector of the state, but shall not be
otherwise an officer or employee of the state or of any state employee organization, and shall
receive such compensation as shall be fixed by law. 

(2)  Any member of the board may be removed by the governor for willful misconduct in office,
willful failure or inability to perform his duties, final conviction of a felony or of any other
offense
involving moral turpitude, or by reason of permanent disability interfering with the performance
of his duties, which removal shall be subject to judicial review. Any vacancy in office shall be
filled in the same manner as the selection of the person vacating the office, and for the unexpired
term. 

(3)  The state personnel board shall adopt, and may from time to time amend or repeal, rules to
implement the provisions of this section and sections 13 and 15 of this article, as amended, and
laws enacted pursuant thereto, including but not limited to rules concerning standardization of
positions, determination of grades of positions, standards of efficient and competent service, the
conduct of competitive examinations of competence, grievance procedures, appeals from actions
by appointing authorities, and conduct of hearings by hearing officers where authorized by law. 

(4)  There is hereby created the department of personnel, which shall be one of the principal
departments of the executive department, the head of which shall be the state personnel director,
who shall be appointed under qualifications established by law. The state personnel director shall
be responsible for the administration of the personnel system of the state under this constitution
and laws enacted pursuant thereto and the rules adopted thereunder by the state personnel board. 

(5)  Adequate appropriations shall be made to carry out the purposes of this section and section
13
of this article.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 3, 1970    Effective July 1, 1971.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 140 015.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1971 ***

Section 15. Veterans' preference. (1) (a) The passing grade on each competitive examination
shall
be the same for each candidate for appointment or employment in the personnel system of the
state or in any comparable civil service or merit system of any agency or political subdivision of
the state, including any municipality chartered or to be chartered under article XX of this
constitution. 

(b) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of each candidate on each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is separated under honorable conditions and who,
other
than for training purposes, (i) served in any branch of the armed forces of the United States
during
any period of any declared war or any undeclared war or other armed hostilities against an armed
foreign enemy, or (ii) served on active duty in any such branch in any campaign or expedition for
which a campaign badge is authorized. 

(c) Ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who has so served, other than for training purposes, and
who, because of disability incurred in the line of duty, is receiving monetary compensation or
disability retired benefits by reason of public laws administered by the department of defense or
the veterans administration, or any successor thereto. 

(d) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is the unremarried widow of any person who was or
would have been entitled to additional points under paragraph (b) or (c) of this subsection (1) or
of any person who died during such service or as a result of service connected cause while on
active duty in any such branch, other than for training purposes. 

(e) No more than a total of ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any such candidate
pursuant to this subsection (1). 

(2) The certificate of the department of defense or of the veterans administration, or any
successor
thereto, shall be conclusive proof of service under honorable conditions or of disability or death
incurred in the line of duty during such service. 

(3) (a) When a reduction in the work force of the state or any such political subdivision thereof
becomes necessary because of lack of work or curtailment of funds, employees not eligible for
added points under subsection (1) of this section shall be separated before those so entitled who
have the same or more service in the employment of the state or such political subdivision,
counting both military service for which such points are added and such employment with the
state or such political subdivision, as the case may be, from which the employee is to be
separated. 

(b) In the case of such a person eligible for added points who has completed twenty or more years
of active military service, no military service shall be counted in determining length of service in
respect to such retention rights. In the case of such a person who has completed less than twenty
years of such military service, no more than ten years of service under subsection (1) (b) (i) and
(ii) shall be counted in determining such length of service for such retention rights. 

(4) The state personnel board and each comparable supervisory or administrative board of any
such civil service or merit system of any agency of the state or any such political subdivision
thereof, shall implement the provisions of this section to assure that all persons entitled to added
points and preference in examinations and retention shall enjoy their full privileges and rights
granted by this section. 

(5) Any examination which is a promotional examination, but which is also open to persons
other
than employees for whom such appointment would be a promotion, shall be considered a
promotional examination for the purposes of this section. 

(6) Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall be
entitled
to the addition of points under this section for more than one appointment or employment with
the
same jurisdiction, personnel system, civil service, or merit system. 

(7) This section shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 1971, and shall grant
veterans'
preference to all persons who have served in the armed forces of the United States from the
Spanish American war as of April 21, 1898, and any other declared or undeclared war, conflict,
engagement, expedition, or campaign for which a campaign badge has been authorized, and who
meet the requirements of service or disability, or both, as provided in this section. This section
shall apply to all public employment examinations, except promotional examinations, conducted
on or after such date, and it shall be in all respects self executing.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective July 1, 1971. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 141 006.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 6.  Local government debt. (1) No political subdivision of the state shall contract any
general obligation debt by loan in any form, whether individually or by contract pursuant to
article
XIV, section 18 (2) (a) of this constitution except by adoption of a legislative measure which
shall
be irrepealable until the indebtedness therein provided for shall have been fully paid or
discharged, specifying the purposes to which the funds to be raised shall be applied and
providing
for the levy of a tax which together with such other revenue, assets, or funds as may be pledged
shall be sufficient to pay the interest and principal of such debt. Except as may be otherwise
provided by the charter of a home rule city and county, city, or town for debt incurred by such
city
and county, city, or town, no such debt shall be created unless the question of incurring the same
be submitted to and approved by a majority of the qualified taxpaying electors voting thereon, as
the term "qualified taxpaying elector" shall be defined by statute. 

(2)  Except as may be otherwise provided by the charter of a home rule city and county, city, or
town, the general assembly shall establish by statute limitations on the authority of any political
subdivision to incur general obligation indebtedness in any form whether individually or by
contract pursuant to article XIV, section 18 (2) (a) of this constitution. 

(3)  Debts contracted by a home rule city and county, city, or town, statutory city or town or
service authority for the purposes of supplying water shall be excepted from the operation of this
section.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 142 007.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 7.  State and political subdivisions may give assistance to any political subdivision. No
provision of this constitution shall be construed to prevent the state or any political subdivision
from giving direct or indirect financial support to any political subdivision as may be authorized
by general statute.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 143 008.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 8.  City indebtedness; ordinance, tax, water obligations excepted.

[Repealed November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 144 009.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 9.  This article not to affect prior obligations.

[Repealed November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 145 012.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 12.  Other officers. The general assembly shall provide for the election or appointment of
such other county officers and such municipal officers of statutory cities and towns as public
convenience may require; and their terms of office shall be as prescribed by statute. 

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 146 016.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 16.  County home rule. (1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6, 8, 9, 10, 12,
and
15 of this article, the qualified electors of each county of the state are hereby vested with the
power to adopt a home rule charter establishing the organization and structure of county
government consistent with this article and statutes enacted pursuant hereto. 

(2)  The general assembly shall provide by statute procedures under which the qualified electors
of
any county may adopt, amend, and repeal a county home rule charter. Action to initiate home rule
may be by petition, signed by not less than five percent of the registered electors of the county in
which home rule is sought, or by any other procedure authorized by statute. No county home rule
charter, amendment thereto, or repeal thereof, shall become effective until approved by a
majority
of the qualified electors of such county voting thereon. 

(3)  A home rule county shall provide all mandatory county functions, services, and facilities and
shall exercise all mandatory powers as may be required by statute. 

(4)  A home rule county shall be empowered to provide such permissive functions, services, and
facilities and to exercise such permissive powers as may be authorized by statute applicable to all
home rule counties, except as may be otherwise prohibited or limited by charter or this
constitution. 

(5)  The provisions of sections 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15 of article XIV of this constitution shall
apply
to counties adopting a home rule charter only to such extent as may be provided in said charter.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 147 017.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 17.  Service authorities. (1) (a)  The general assembly shall provide by statute for the
organization, structure, functions, services, facilities, and powers of service authorities pursuant
to
the following requirements: 

(b)  A service authority may be formed only upon the approval of a majority of the qualified
electors voting thereon in the territory to be included. 

(c)  The territory within a service authority may include all or part of one county or home rule
county or all or part of two or more adjoining counties or home rule counties, but shall not
include
only a part of any city and county, home rule city or town, or statutory city or town at the time of
formation of the service authority. No more than one service authority shall be established in any
territory and, in no event, shall a service authority be formed in the metropolitan area composed
of
the city and county of Denver, and Adams, Arapahoe, and Jefferson counties which does not
include all of the city and county of Denver and all or portions of Adams, Arapahoe, and
Jefferson
counties. 

(d)  The boundaries of any service authority shall not be such as to create any enclave. 

(e)  No territory shall be included within the boundaries of more than one service authority. 

(2) (a)  The general assembly shall also provide by statute for: 

(b)  The inclusion and exclusion of territory in or from a service authority; 

(c)  The dissolution of a service authority; 

(d)  The merger of all or a part of two or more adjacent service authorities, except that such
merger shall require the approval of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon in each of
the affected service authorities; and, 

(e)  The boundaries of any service authority or any special taxing districts therein or the method
by which such boundaries are to be determined or changed; and 

(f)  The method for payment of any election expenses. 

(3) (a)  The general assembly shall designate by statute the functions, services, and facilities
which
may be provided by a service authority, and the manner in which the members of the governing
body of any service authority shall be elected from compact districts of approximately equal
population by the qualified electors of the authority, including the terms and qualifications of
such
members; but for the first five years after formation of any service authority, the members of the
governing body shall be elected by the qualified electors within the boundaries of the authority
from among the mayors, councilmen, trustees, and county commissioners holding office at the
time of their election in home rule and statutory cities, cities and counties, home rule and
statutory
towns, and home rule and statutory counties located within or partially within the authority. This
restriction shall expire January 1, 1980. The general assembly may provide that members of the
governing body may be elected by a vote of each compact district or by an at large vote or
combination thereof. Notwithstanding any provision in this constitution or the charter of any
home rule city and county, city, town, or county to the contrary, mayors, councilmen, trustees,
and
county commissioners may additionally hold elective office with a service authority and serve
therein either with or without compensation, as provided by statute. 

(b)  A service authority shall provide any function, service, or facility designated by statute and
authorized as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this subsection. 

(c)  All propositions to provide functions, services, or facilities shall be submitted, either
individually or jointly, to the qualified electors in the manner and form prescribed by law. 

(d)  Each such function, service, or facility shall be authorized if approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of the authority voting thereon; but if the service authority includes territory in
more than one county, approval shall also require a majority of the qualified electors of the
authority voting thereon in those included portions of each of the affected counties. 

(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this subsection, where, upon
formation of a service authority, any function, service, or facility is already being provided in at
least four counties or portions thereof by a single special district, regional planning commission
or
metropolitan council, or an association of political subdivisions, the general assembly may
provide, without a vote of the qualified electors, for assumption by one or more service
authorities
of such function, service, or facility. 

(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this subsection, a service
authority may contract with any other political subdivision to provide or receive any function,
service, or facility designated by statute; but a service authority shall not be invested with any
taxing power as a consequence of such contract. 

(4) (a)  A service authority shall be a body corporate and a political subdivision of the state. 

(b)  Any other provision of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, any service authority
formed under this article and the statutes pursuant thereto may exercise such powers to
accomplish the purposes and to provide the authorized functions, services, and facilities of such
authority as the general assembly may provide by statute. 

(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of article XX of this constitution, any authorized function,
service, or facility may be provided exclusively by the authority or concurrently with other
jurisdictions as may be prescribed by statute, subject to the provisions of subsections (3) (c), (3)
(d), (3) (e), and (3) (f) of this section.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 148 018.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 18.  Intergovernmental relationships. (1) (a) Any other provisions of this constitution to
the contrary notwithstanding: 

(b)  The general assembly may provide by statute for the terms and conditions under which one
or
more service authorities may succeed to the rights, properties, and other assets and assume the
obligations of any other political subdivision included partially or entirely within such authority,
incident to the powers vested in, and the functions, services, and facilities authorized to be
provided by the service authority, whether vested and authorized at the time of the formation of
the service authority or subsequent thereto; and, 

(c)  The general assembly may provide by statute for the terms and conditions under which a
county, home rule county, city and county, home rule city or town, statutory city or town, or
quasi municipal corporation, or any combination thereof may succeed to the rights, properties,
and other assets and assume the obligations of any quasi municipal corporation located partially
or entirely within its boundaries. 

(d)  The general assembly may provide by statute procedures whereby any county, home rule
county, city and county, home rule city or town, statutory city or town, or service authority may
establish special taxing districts. 

(2) (a)  Nothing in this constitution shall be construed to prohibit the state or any of its political
subdivisions from cooperating or contracting with one another or with the government of the
United States to provide any function, service, or facility lawfully authorized to each of the
cooperating or contracting units, including the sharing of costs, the imposition of taxes, or the
incurring of debt. 

(b)  Nothing in this constitution shall be construed to prohibit the authorization by statute of a
separate governmental entity as an instrument to be used through voluntary participation by
cooperating or contracting political subdivisions. 

(c)  Nothing in this constitution shall be construed to prohibit any political subdivision of the
state
from contracting with private persons, associations, or corporations for the provision of any
legally authorized functions, services, or facilities within or without its boundaries. 

(d)  Nothing in this constitution shall be construed to prohibit the general assembly from
providing by statute for state imposed and collected taxes to be shared with and distributed to
political subdivisions of the state except that this provision shall not in any way limit the powers
of home rule cities and towns.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 149 009.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1972 ***

Section 9. Procedure and requirements for adoption. (1)  Notwithstanding any provision in
sections 4, 5, and 6 of this article to the contrary, the qualified electors of each city and county,
city, and town of the state are hereby vested with the power to adopt, amend, and repeal a home
rule charter. 

(2)  The general assembly shall provide by statute procedures under which the qualified electors
of
any proposed or existing city and county, city, or town may adopt, amend, and repeal a municipal
home rule charter. Action to initiate home rule shall be by petition, signed by not less than five
percent of the qualified electors of the proposed or existing city and county, city, or town, or by
proper ordinance by the city council or board of trustees of a town, submitting the question of the
adoption of a municipal home rule charter to the qualified electors of the city and county, city, or
town. No municipal home rule charter, amendment thereto, or repeal thereof, shall become
effective until approved by a majority of the qualified electors of such city and county, city, or
town voting thereon. A new city or town may acquire home rule status at the time of its
incorporation. 

(3)  The provisions of this article as they existed prior to the effective date of this section, as they
relate to procedures for the initial adoption of home rule charters and for the amendment of
existing home rule charters, shall continue to apply until superseded by statute. 

(4)  It is the purpose of this section to afford to the people of all cities, cities and counties, and
towns the right to home rule regardless of population, period of incorporation, or other limitation,
and for this purpose this section shall be self executing. It is the further purpose of this section to
facilitate adoption and amendment of home rule through such procedures as may hereafter be
enacted by the general assembly.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 150 029.0 002.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 29. Equality of the sexes. Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged
by the state of Colorado or any of its political subdivisions on account of sex. 

[Adopted November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, January 11, 1973.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 151 005.0 008.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 5.  Educational institutions. (1) The following educational institutions are declared to be
state institutions of higher education: The university at Boulder, Colorado Springs, and Denver;
the university at Fort Collins; the school of mines at Golden; and such other institutions of higher
education as now exist or may hereafter be established by law if they are designated by law as
state institutions. The establishment, management, and abolition of the state institutions shall be
subject to the control of the state, under the provisions of the constitution and such laws and
regulations as the general assembly may provide; except that the regents of the university at
Boulder, Colorado Springs, and Denver may, whenever in their judgment the needs of that
institution demand such action, establish, maintain, and conduct all or any part of the schools of
medicine, dentistry, nursing, and pharmacy of the university, together with hospitals and
supporting facilities and programs related to health, at Denver; and further, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent state educational institutions from giving temporary lecture
courses in any part of the state, or conducting class excursions for the purpose of investigation
and
study; and provided further, that subject to prior approval by the general assembly, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the state institutions of higher education from hereafter
establishing, maintaining, and conducting or discontinuing centers, medical centers, or branches
of such institutions in any part of the state. 

(2)  The governing boards of the state institutions of higher education, whether established by
this
constitution or by law, shall have the general supervision of their respective institutions and the
exclusive control and direction of all funds of and appropriations to their respective institutions,
unless otherwise provided by law.

[As amended November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, January 11,
1973.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 152 012.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 12.  Regents of university. There shall be nine regents of the university of Colorado who
shall be elected in the manner prescribed by law for terms of six years each. Said regents shall
constitute a body corporate to be known by the name and style of "The Regents of the University
of Colorado". The board of regents shall select from among its members a chairman who shall
conduct the meetings of the board and a vice chairman who shall assume the duties of the
chairman in case of his absence.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 7, 1972    Effective July 1, 1973.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 153 013.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 13.  President of university. The regents of the university shall elect a president of the
university who shall hold his office until removed by the board of regents. He shall be the
principal executive officer of the university, a member of the faculty thereof, and shall carry out
the policies and programs established by the board of regents.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 7, 1972    Effective July 1, 1973.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 154 014.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 14.  Control of university.

[Repealed November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 11, 1973.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 155 002.A 011.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 2a.  Student loan program. The general assembly may by law provide for a student loan
program to assist students enrolled in educational institutions.

[Added November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, January 11, 1973.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 156 010.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1973 ***

Section 10. The state, but not its political subdivisions, shall not appropriate funds or lend or
pledge the credit or faith thereof, directly or indirectly, in any manner to, or in aid of the 1976
Winter Olympic Games.

[Adopted November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, January 11, 1973.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 157 006.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 6. Appointment of officers   vacancy. (1) The governor shall nominate, and, by and with
the consent of the senate, appoint all officers whose offices are established by this constitution, or
which may be created by law, and whose appointment or election is not otherwise provided for,
and may remove any such officer for incompetency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. If
the vacancy occurs in any such office while the senate is not in session, the governor shall
appoint
some fit person to discharge the duties thereof until the next meeting of the senate when he shall
nominate and, by and with the consent of the senate, appoint some fit person to fill such office. 

(2) If the office of state treasurer, secretary of state, or attorney general shall be vacated by death,
resignation, or otherwise, the governor shall nominate and, by and with the consent of the senate,
appoint a successor. The appointee shall hold the office until his successor shall be elected and
qualified in such manner as may be provided by law. If the vacancy occurs in any such office
while the senate is not in session, the governor shall appoint some fit person to discharge the
duties thereof until the next meeting of the senate, when he shall nominate and, by and with the
consent of the senate, appoint some fit person to fill such office. 

(3) The senate in deliberating upon executive nominations may sit with closed doors, but in
acting
upon nominations they shall sit with open doors, and the vote shall be taken by ayes and noes,
which shall be entered upon the journal. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 158 013.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***
          
Section 13. Succession to the office of governor and lieutenant governor. (1) In the case of the
death, impeachment, conviction of a felony, or resignation of the governor, the office of governor
shall be vacant and the lieutenant governor shall take the oath of office and shall become
governor. 

(2) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the lieutenant governor, because of death,
impeachment, conviction of a felony, or resignation, the governor shall nominate a lieutenant
governor who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of the
general
assembly. If the person nominated is a member of the general assembly, he may take the oath of
office of lieutenant governor, and the legislative seat to which he was elected shall be vacant and
filled in the manner prescribed by law pursuant to section 2 of article V of this constitution. 

(3) In the event that the governor elect fails to assume the office of governor because of death,
resignation, or conviction of a felony, or refuses to take the oath of office, the lieutenant
governor elect shall take the oath of office and shall become governor on the second Tuesday in
January in accordance with the provisions of section 1 of article IV of this constitution. In the
event the lieutenant governor elect fails to assume the office of lieutenant governor because of
death, resignation, or conviction of a felony, or refuses to take the oath of office, the
governor elect upon taking office shall nominate a lieutenant governor who shall take the oath of
office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of the general assembly. If the person
nominated is a member of the general assembly, he may take the oath of office of lieutenant
governor, and the legislative seat to which he was elected shall be vacant and filled in the manner
prescribed by law pursuant to section 2 of article V of this constitution. 

(4) In the event the lieutenant governor or lieutenant governor elect accedes to the office of
governor because of a vacancy in said office for any of the causes enumerated in subsections (1)
and (3) of this section, the office of lieutenant governor shall be vacant. Upon taking office, the
new governor shall nominate a lieutenant governor who shall take the oath of office upon
confirmation by a majority vote of both houses of the general assembly. If the person nominated
is
a member of the general assembly, he may take the oath of office of lieutenant governor, and the
legislative seat to which he was elected shall be vacant and filled in the manner prescribed by law
pursuant to section 2 of article V of this constitution. 

(5) In the event the governor or lieutenant governor, or governor elect or lieutenant
governor elect, at the time either of the latter is to take the oath of office, is absent from the state
or is suffering from a physical or mental disability, the powers and duties of the office of
governor
and the office of lieutenant governor shall, until the absence or disability ceases, temporarily
devolve upon the lieutenant governor, in the case of the governor, and, in the case of the
lieutenant governor, upon the first named member of the general assembly listed in subsection
(7)
of this section who is affiliated with the same political party as the lieutenant governor; except
that if the lieutenant governor and none of said members of the general assembly are affiliated
with the same political party, the temporary vacancy in the office of lieutenant governor shall be
filled by the first named member in said subsection (7). In the event that the offices of both the
governor and lieutenant governor are vacant at the same time for any of the reasons enumerated
in
this subsection (5), the successors to fill the vacancy in the office of governor and in the office of
lieutenant governor shall be, respectively, the first and second named members of the general
assembly listed in subsection (7) of this section who are affiliated with the same political party as
the governor; except that if the governor and none of said members of the general assembly are
affiliated with the same political party, the vacancy in the office of governor and the vacancy in
the office of lieutenant governor, respectively, shall be filled by the first and second named
members in said subsection (7). The pro rata salary of the governor or lieutenant governor shall
be
paid to his successor for as long as he serves in such capacity, during which time he shall receive
no other salary from the state. 

(6) The governor or governor elect, lieutenant governor or lieutenant governor elect, or person
acting as governor or lieutenant governor may transmit to the president of the senate and the
speaker of the house of representatives his written declaration that he suffers from a physical or
mental disability and he is unable to properly discharge the powers and duties of the office of
governor or lieutenant governor. In the event no such written declaration has been made, his
physical or mental disability shall be determined by a majority of the supreme court after a
hearing
held pursuant to a joint request submitted by joint resolution adopted by two thirds of all
members
of each house of the general assembly. Such determination shall be final and conclusive. The
supreme court, upon its own initiative, shall determine if and when such disability ceases. 

(7) In the event that the offices of both the governor and lieutenant governor are vacant at the
same time for any of the reasons enumerated in subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section, the
successor to fill the vacancy in the office of governor shall be the first named of the following
members of the general assembly who is affiliated with the same political party as the governor:
President of the senate, speaker of the house of representatives, minority leader of the senate, or
minority leader of the house of representatives; except that if the governor and none of said
members of the general assembly are affiliated with the same political party, the vacancy shall be
filled by one such member in the order of precedence listed in this subsection (7). The member
filling the vacancy pursuant to this subsection (7) shall take the oath of office of governor and
shall become governor. The office of lieutenant governor shall be filled in the same manner as
prescribed in subsection (3) of this section when the lieutenant governor elect fails to assume the
office of lieutenant governor. 

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974.] 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 159 014.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***
     
Section 14. Lieutenant governor president of senate. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 160 015.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 15. No lieutenant governor   who to act as governor. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 161 017.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 17. Executive officers to make report. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 
     
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 162 021.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 21. Elected auditor of state   powers and duties. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 163 002.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 2. Election of members   oath   vacancies. (1) A general election for members of the
general assembly shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each
even numbered year, at such places in each county as now are or hereafter may be provided by
law. 

(2) Each member of the general assembly, before he enters upon his official duties, shall take an
oath or affirmation to support the constitution of the United States and of the state of Colorado
and to faithfully perform the duties of his office according to the best of his ability. This oath or
affirmation shall be administered in the chamber of the house to which the member has been
elected. 

(3) Any vacancy occurring in either house by death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled in the
manner prescribed by law. The person appointed to fill the vacancy shall be a member of the
same
political party, if any, as the person whose termination of membership in the general assembly
created the vacancy. 

[Amended November 7, 1950; as amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 164 003.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 3. Terms of senators and representatives.  Senators shall be elected for the term of four
years and representatives for the term of two years. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 165 005.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 5. Classification of senators. The senate shall be divided so that one half of the senators,
as nearly as practicable, may be chosen biennially. 

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974.] 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 166 007.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 7. General assembly   shall meet when   term of members   committees. The general
assembly shall meet in regular session at 10 a.m. on the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of
January of each year. The general assembly shall meet at other times when convened in special
session by the governor pursuant to section 9 of article IV of this constitution or by written
request
by two thirds of the members of each house to the presiding officer of each house to consider
only
those subjects specified in such request. The term of service of the members of the general
assembly shall begin on the convening of the first regular session of the general assembly next
after their election. The committees of the general assembly, unless otherwise provided by the
general assembly, shall expire on the convening of the first regular session after a general
election.
At such regular sessions convening in even-numbered years, the general assembly shall not enact
any bills except those raising revenue, those making appropriations, and those pertaining to
subjects designated in writing by the governor during the first ten days of the session.

[As amended November 5, 1974    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 167 008.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 8. Members precluded from holding office. No senator or representative shall, while
serving as such, be appointed to any civil office under this state; and no member of congress, or
other person holding any office (except of attorney at law, notary public, or in the militia) under
the United States or this state, shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 168 009.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 9. Increase of salary   when forbidden. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 169 010.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 10. Each house to choose its officers. At the beginning of the first regular session after a
general election, and at such other times as may be necessary, the senate shall elect one of its
members president, and the house of representatives shall elect one of its members as speaker.
The president and speaker shall serve as such until the election and installation of their respective
successors. Each house shall choose its other officers and shall judge the election and
qualification of its members. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 170 012.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 12. Each house makes and enforces rules. Each house shall have power to determine the
rules of its proceedings and adopt rules providing punishment of its members or other persons for
contempt or disorderly behavior in its presence; to enforce obedience to its process; to protect its
members against violence, or offers of bribes or private solicitation, and, with the concurrence of
two thirds, to expel a member, but not a second time for the same cause, and shall have all other
powers necessary for the legislature of a free state. A member expelled for corruption shall not
thereafter be eligible to either house of the same general assembly, and punishment for contempt
or disorderly behavior shall not bar a prosecution for the same offense. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 171 013.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 13. Journal   ayes and noes to be entered   when. Each house shall keep a journal of its
proceedings and publish the same, except such parts as require secrecy, and the ayes and noes on
any question shall, at the desire of any two members, be entered on the journal.

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 172 016.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 16. Privileges of members. The members of the general assembly shall, in all cases
except
treason or felony, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the sessions of their
respective houses, or any committees thereof, and in going to and returning from the same; and
for
any speech or debate in either house, or any committees thereof, they shall not be questioned in
any other place. 

As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 173 026.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 26. Signing of bills. The presiding officer of each house shall sign all bills and joint
resolutions passed by the general assembly, and the fact of signing shall be entered on or
appended to the journal thereof. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 174 027.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 27. Officers and employees   compensation. The general assembly shall prescribe by law
or by joint resolution the number, duties, and compensation of the appointed officers and
employees of each house and of the two houses, and no payment shall be made from the state
treasury, or be in any way authorized to any person except to an officer or employee appointed
and acting pursuant to law or joint resolution. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 175 028.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 28. Extra compensation to officers, employees, or contractors forbidden. No bill shall be
passed giving any extra compensation to any public officer or employee, agent, or contractor
after
services have been rendered or contract made nor providing for the payment of any claim made
against the state without previous authority of law. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 176 030.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 30. Salary of governor and judges to be fixed by the legislature   term not to be extended
or salaries increased or decreased. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 177 033.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 33. Disbursement of public money. No moneys in the state treasury shall be disbursed
therefrom by the treasurer except upon appropriations made by law, or otherwise authorized by
law, and any amount disbursed shall be substantiated by vouchers signed and approved in the
manner prescribed by law. 

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 178 037.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 37. Change of venue. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 179 038.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 38. No liability exchanged or released. No obligation or liability of any person,
association, or corporation, held or owned by the state, or any municipal corporation therein,
shall
ever be exchanged, transferred, remitted, released, or postponed or in any way diminished by the
general assembly, nor shall such liability or obligation be extinguished except by payment thereof
into the proper treasury. This section shall not prohibit the write off or release of uncollectible
accounts as provided by general law. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 180 041.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 41. Offering, giving, promising money or other consideration. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 181 042.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 42. Corrupt solicitation of members and officers. 

[Repealed November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 182 043.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 43. Member interested shall not vote. A member who has a personal or private interest in
any measure or bill proposed or pending before the general assembly, shall disclose the fact to
the
house of which he is a member, and shall not vote thereon. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 183 046.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 46. Senatorial and representative districts. The state shall be divided into as many
senatorial and representative districts as there are members of the senate and house of
representatives respectively, each district in each house having a population as nearly equal as
may be, as required by the constitution of the United States, but in no event shall there be more
than five percent deviation between the most populous and the least populous district in each
house. 

[As amended by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 184 047.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 47. Composition of districts. (1) Each district shall be as compact in area as possible and
the aggregate linear distance of all district boundaries shall be as short as possible. Each district
shall consist of contiguous whole general election precincts. Districts of the same house shall not
overlap. 

(2) Except when necessary to meet the equal population requirements of section 46, no part of
one
county shall be added to all or part of another county in forming districts. Within counties whose
territory is contained in more than one district of the same house, the number of cities and towns
whose territory is contained in more than one district of the same house shall be as small as
possible. When county, city, or town boundaries are changed, adjustments, if any, in legislative
districts shall be as prescribed by law. 

(3) Consistent with the provisions of this section and section 46 of this article, communities of
interest, including ethnic, cultural, economic, trade area, geographic, and demographic factors,
shall be preserved within a single district wherever possible. 

[As amended by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 185 048.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 48. Revision and alteration of districts   reapportionment commission. (1) (a) After each
federal census of the United States, the senatorial districts and representative districts shall be
established, revised, or altered, and the members of the senate and the house of representatives
apportioned among them, by a Colorado reapportionment commission consisting of eleven
members, to be appointed and having the qualifications as prescribed in this section. Of such
members, four shall be appointed by the legislative department, three by the executive
department,
and four by the judicial department of the state.

(b) The four legislative members shall be the speaker of the house of representatives, the
minority
leader of the house of representatives, and the majority and minority leaders of the senate, or the
designee of any such officer to serve in his stead, which acceptance of service or designation
shall
be made no later than July 1 of the year following that in which the federal census is taken. The
three executive members shall be appointed by the governor between July 1 and July 10 of such
year, and the four judicial members shall be appointed by the chief justice of the Colorado
supreme court between July 10 and July 20 of such year. 

(c) Commission members shall be qualified electors of the state of Colorado. No more than four
commission members shall be members of the general assembly. No more than six commission
members shall be affiliated with the same political party. No more than four commission
members
shall be residents of the same congressional district, and each congressional district shall have at
least one resident as a commission member. At least one commission member shall reside west
of
the continental divide. 

(d) Any vacancy created by the death or resignation of a member, or otherwise, shall be filled by
the respective appointing authority. Members of the commission shall hold office until their
reapportionment and redistricting plan is implemented. No later than August 1 of the year of their
appointment, the governor shall convene the commission and appoint a temporary chairman who
shall preside until the commission elects its own officers. 

(e) Within ninety days after the commission has been convened or the necessary census data are
available, whichever is later, the commission shall publish a preliminary plan for
reapportionment
of the members of the general assembly and shall hold public hearings thereon in several places
throughout the state within forty five days after the date of such publication. Within forty five
days after the completion of such hearings, the commission shall finalize its plan and submit the
same to the Colorado supreme court for review and determination as to compliance with sections
46 and 47 of this article. Such review and determination shall take precedence over other matters
before the court. The supreme court shall adopt rules for such proceedings and for the production
and presentation of supportive evidence for such plan. The supreme court shall either approve the
plan or return the plan and the court's reasons for disapproval to the commission. If the plan is
returned, the commission shall revise and modify it to conform to the court's requirements and
resubmit the plan to the court within twenty days. If the plan is approved by the court, it shall be
filed with the secretary of state for implementation no later than March 15 of the second year
following the year in which the census was taken. The commission shall keep a public record of
all the proceedings of the commission and shall be responsible for the publication and
distribution
of copies of each plan. 

(f) The general assembly shall appropriate sufficient funds for the compensation and payment of
the expenses of the commission members and any staff employed by it. The commission shall
have access to statistical information compiled by the state or its political subdivisions and
necessary for its reapportionment duties. 

[As amended by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 186 049.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 49. Appointment of state auditor   term   qualifications   duties. (1) The general assembly,
by a majority vote of the members elected to and serving in each house, shall appoint, without
regard to political affiliation, a state auditor, who shall be a certified public accountant licensed
to
practice in this state, to serve for a term of five years and until his successor is appointed and
qualified. Except as provided by law, he shall be ineligible for appointment to any other public
office in this state from which compensation is derived while serving as state auditor. He may be
removed for cause at any time by a two thirds vote of the members elected to and serving in each
house. 

(2) It shall be the duty of the state auditor to conduct post audits of all financial transactions and
accounts kept by or for all departments, offices, agencies, and institutions of the state
government,
including educational institutions notwithstanding the provisions of section 14 of article IX of
this
constitution, and to perform similar or related duties with respect to such political subdivisions of
the state as shall from time to time be required of him by law. 

(3) Not more than three members of the staff of the state auditor shall be exempt from the
personnel system of this state. 

As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 187 008.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 8.  Religious test and race discrimination forbidden   sectarian tenets. No religious test or
qualification shall ever be required of any person as a condition of admission into any public
educational institution of the state, either as a teacher or student; and no teacher or student of any
such institution shall ever be required to attend or participate in any religious service whatsoever.
No sectarian tenets or doctrines shall ever be taught in the public school, nor shall any distinction
or classification of pupils be made on account of race or color, nor shall any pupil be assigned or
transported to any public educational institution for the purpose of achieving racial balance.

[As amended by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 188 012.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 12.  Public funds   report of state treasurer. (1) The general assembly may provide by law
for the safekeeping and management of the public funds in the custody of the state treasurer, but,
notwithstanding any such provision, the state treasurer and his sureties shall be responsible
therefor. 

(2)  The state treasurer shall keep adequate records of all moneys coming into his custody and
shall at the end of each quarter of the fiscal year submit a written report to the governor, signed
under oath, showing the condition of the state treasury, the amount of money in the several funds,
and where such money is kept or deposited. Swearing falsely to any such report shall be deemed
perjury. 

(3)  The governor shall cause every such quarterly report to be promptly published in at least one
newspaper printed at the seat of government, and otherwise as the general assembly may require.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 189 018.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 18.  License fees and excise taxes   use of. On and after July 1, 1935, the proceeds from
the imposition of any license, registration fee, or other charge with respect to the operation of any
motor vehicle upon any public highway in this state and the proceeds from the imposition of any
excise tax on gasoline or other liquid motor fuel except aviation fuel used for aviation purposes
shall, except costs of administration, be used exclusively for the construction, maintenance, and
supervision of the public highways of this state. Any taxes imposed upon aviation fuel shall be
used exclusively for aviation purposes.

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 190 002.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 2.  No aid to corporations   no joint ownership by state, county, city, town, or school
district. Neither the state, nor any county, city, town, township, or school district shall make any
donation or grant to, or in aid of, or become a subscriber to, or shareholder in any corporation or
company or a joint owner with any person, company, or corporation, public or private, in or out
of
the state, except as to such ownership as may accrue to the state by escheat, or by forfeiture, by
operation or provision of law; and except as to such ownership as may accrue to the state, or to
any county, city, town, township, or school district, or to either or any of them, jointly with any
person, company, or corporation, by forfeiture or sale of real estate for nonpayment of taxes, or
by
donation or devise for public use, or by purchase by or on behalf of any or either of them, jointly
with any or either of them, under execution in cases of fines, penalties, or forfeiture of
recognizance, breach of condition of official bond, or of bond to secure public moneys, or the
performance of any contract in which they or any of them may be jointly or severally interested.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any city or town from becoming a
subscriber
or shareholder in any corporation or company, public or private, or a joint owner with any
person,
company, or corporation, public or private, in order to effect the development of energy resources
after discovery, or production, transportation, or transmission of energy in whole or in part for
the
benefit of the inhabitants of such city or town.

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 191 007.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 7.  Bribery   corrupt solicitation. (1) Any person who directly or indirectly offers, gives,
or
promises any money or thing of value or privilege to any member of the general assembly or to
any other public officer in the executive or judicial department of the state government to
influence him in the performance of any of his public or official powers or duties is guilty of
bribery and subject to such punishment therefor as may be prescribed by law.

(2)  The offense of corrupt solicitation of members of the general assembly or of public officers
of
the state or of any political subdivision thereof and any occupation or practice of solicitation of
such members or officers to influence their official action shall be defined by law and shall be
punished by fine, imprisonment, or both.

[Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 192 011.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 11.  Elected public officers   term   salary   vacancy. No law shall extend the term of any
elected public officer after his election or appointment nor shall the salary of any elected public
officer be increased or decreased during the term of office for which he was elected. The term of
office of any officer elected to fill a vacancy shall terminate at the expiration of the term during
which the vacancy occurred.

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 193 003.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 3.  Striking off territory   vote. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no part of the
territory of any county shall be stricken off and added to an adjoining county, without first
submitting the question to the qualified electors of the county from which the territory is
proposed
to be stricken off; nor unless a majority of all the qualified electors of said county voting on the
question shall vote therefor.

[As amended by the People November 5, 1974    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 194 001.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 1.  Incorporated. The municipal corporation known as the city of Denver and all
municipal corporations and that part of the quasi municipal corporation known as the county of
Arapahoe, in the state of Colorado, included within the exterior boundaries of the said city of
Denver as the same shall be bounded when this amendment takes effect, are hereby consolidated
and are hereby declared to be a single body politic and corporate, by the name of the "City and
County of Denver". By that name said corporation shall have perpetual succession, and shall
own,
possess, and hold all property, real and personal, theretofore owned, possessed, or held by the
said
city of Denver and by such included municipal corporations, and also all property, real and
personal, theretofore owned, possessed, or held by the said county of Arapahoe, and shall
assume,
manage, and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights
and liabilities, and shall acquire all benefits and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations, and
indebtedness of said city of Denver and of said included municipal corporations and of the
county
of Arapahoe; by that name may sue and defend, plead and be impleaded, in all courts and places,
and in all matters and proceedings; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at
pleasure; may purchase, receive, hold, and enjoy or sell and dispose of, real and personal
property;
may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of all kinds of property, in fee simple, or in trust for
public, charitable, or other purposes; and do all things and acts necessary to carry out the
purposes
of such gifts, bequests, and donations, with power to manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of
the same in accordance with the terms of the gift, bequest, or trust; shall have the power, within
or
without its territorial limits, to construct, condemn and purchase, purchase, acquire, lease, add to,
maintain, conduct, and operate water works, light plants, power plants, transportation systems,
heating plants, and any other public utilities or works or ways local in use and extent, in whole or
in part, and everything required therefore, for the use of said city and county and the inhabitants
thereof, and any such systems, plants, or works or ways, or any contracts in relation or
connection
with either, that may exist and which said city and county may desire to purchase, in whole or in
part, the same or any part thereof may be purchased by said city and county which may enforce
such purchase by proceedings at law as in taking land for public use by right of eminent domain,
and shall have the power to issue bonds upon the vote of the taxpaying electors, at any special or
general election, in any amount necessary to carry out any of said powers or purposes, as may by
the charter be provided. 

The provisions of section 3 of article XIV of this constitution and the general annexation and
consolidation statutes of the state relating to counties shall apply to the city and county of
Denver.
Any contiguous town, city, or territory hereafter annexed to or consolidated with the city and
county of Denver, under any such laws of this state, in whatsoever county the same may be at the
time, shall be detached per se from such other county and become a municipal and territorial part
of the city and county of Denver, together with all property thereunto belonging. 

The city and county of Denver shall alone always constitute one judicial district of the state. 

(The preceding three paragraphs were amended by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective
upon
proclamation of the Governor, December 20, 1974.) 

Any other provisions of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding: 

No annexation or consolidation proceeding shall be initiated after the effective date of this
amendment pursuant to the general annexation and consolidation statutes of the state of Colorado
to annex lands to or consolidate lands with the city and county of Denver until such proposed
annexation or consolidation is first approved by a majority vote of a six member boundary
control
commission composed of one commissioner from each of the boards of county commissioners of
Adams, Arapahoe, and Jefferson counties, respectively, and three elected officials of the city and
county of Denver to be chosen by the mayor. The commissioners from each of the said counties
shall be appointed by resolution of their respective boards. 

No land located in any county other than Adams, Arapahoe, or Jefferson counties shall be
annexed to or consolidated with the city and county of Denver unless such annexation or
consolidation is approved by the unanimous vote of all the members of the board of county
commissioners of the county in which such land is located. 

Any territory attached to the city and county of Denver or the city of Lakewood or the city of
Aurora during the period extending from April 1, 1974, to the effective date of this amendment,
whether or not subject to judicial review, shall be detached therefrom on July 1, 1975, unless any
such annexation is ratified by the boundary control commission on or before July 1, 1975. 

Nothing in this amendment shall be construed as prohibiting the entry of any final judgment in
any annexation judicial review proceeding pending on April 1, 1974, declaring any annexation by
the city and county of Denver to be invalid. 

The boundary control commission shall have the power at any time by four concurring votes to
detach all or any portion of any territory validly annexed to the city and county of Denver during
the period extending from March 1, 1973, to the effective date of this amendment. 

All actions, including actions regarding procedural rules, shall be adopted by the commission by
majority vote. Each commissioner shall have one vote, including the commissioner who acts as
the chairman of the commission. All procedural rules adopted by the commission shall be filed
with the secretary of state. 

This amendment shall be self executing. 

[The preceding seven paragraphs were adopted November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 301 000.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 1.  Nuclear detonations prohibited   exceptions. No nuclear explosive device may be
detonated or placed in the ground for the purpose of detonation in this state except in accordance
with this article. 


Section 2.  Election required. Before the emplacement of any nuclear explosive device in the
ground in this state, the detonation of that device shall first have been approved by the voters
through enactment of an initiated or referred measure authorizing that detonation, such measure
having been ordered, proposed, submitted to the voters, and approved as provided in section 1 of
article V of this constitution. 


Section 3.  Certification of indemnification required. Before the detonation or emplacement for
the purpose of detonation of any nuclear explosive device, a competent state official or agency
designated by the governor shall first have certified that sufficient and secure financial resources
exist in the form of applicable insurance, self insurance, indemnity bonds, indemnification
agreements, or otherwise, without utilizing state funds, to compensate in full all parties that
might
foreseeably suffer damage to person or property from ground motion, ionizing radiation, other
pollution, or other hazard attributable to such detonation. Damage is attributable to such
detonation without regard to negligence and without regard to any concurrent or intervening
cause.


Section 4.  Article self executing. This article shall be in all respects self executing; but, the
general assembly may by law provide for its more effective enforcement and may by law also
impose additional restrictions or conditions upon the emplacement or detonation of any nuclear
explosive device. 


Section 5.  Severability. If any provision of this article, or its application in any particular case, is
held invalid, the remainder of the article and its application in all other cases shall remain
unimpaired.

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

 *** MEND ***

*** MSTART 195 001.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 1.  Nuclear detonations prohibited   exceptions. No nuclear explosive device may be
detonated or placed in the ground for the purpose of detonation in this state except in accordance
with this article. 

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 196 002.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 2.  Election required. Before the emplacement of any nuclear explosive device in the
ground in this state, the detonation of that device shall first have been approved by the voters
through enactment of an initiated or referred measure authorizing that detonation, such measure
having been ordered, proposed, submitted to the voters, and approved as provided in section 1 of
article V of this constitution. 

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 197 003.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 3.  Certification of indemnification required. Before the detonation or emplacement for
the purpose of detonation of any nuclear explosive device, a competent state official or agency
designated by the governor shall first have certified that sufficient and secure financial resources
exist in the form of applicable insurance, self insurance, indemnity bonds, indemnification
agreements, or otherwise, without utilizing state funds, to compensate in full all parties that
might
foreseeably suffer damage to person or property from ground motion, ionizing radiation, other
pollution, or other hazard attributable to such detonation. Damage is attributable to such
detonation without regard to negligence and without regard to any concurrent or intervening
cause.

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 198 004.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 4.  Article self executing. This article shall be in all respects self executing; but, the
general assembly may by law provide for its more effective enforcement and may by law also
impose additional restrictions or conditions upon the emplacement or detonation of any nuclear
explosive device. 

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 199 005.0 026.0 0 CO 1876 1974 ***

Section 5.  Severability. If any provision of this article, or its application in any particular case, is
held invalid, the remainder of the article and its application in all other cases shall remain
unimpaired.

[Adopted by the People, November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974.]

 *** MEND ***



*** MSTART 200 029.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1975 ***

Section 29. Contracts for facilities and supplies. All stationery, printing, paper, and fuel used in
the legislative and other departments of government shall be furnished; and the printing and
binding and distributing of the laws, journals, department reports, and other printing and binding;
and the repairing and furnishing the halls and rooms used for the meeting of the general assembly
and its committees, shall be performed under contract, to be given to the lowest responsible
bidder, below such maximum price and under such regulations as may be prescribed by law. No
member or officer of any department of the government shall be in any way interested in any
such
contract; and all such contracts shall be subject to the approval of the governor or his designee. 

[As amended November 5, 1974   Effective July 1, 1975.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 201 044.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1975 ***

Section 44. Representatives in congress. The general assembly shall divide the state into as many
congressional districts as there are representatives in congress apportioned to the state by the
congress of United States for the election of one representative to congress for each district. 
When a new apportionment shall be made by congress, the general assembly shall divide the
state
into congressional districts accordingly.

[Amended 1974, effective January 1, 1975]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 202 006.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1976 ***

Section 6.  Self propelled equipment, motor vehicles, and certain other movable equipment. The
general assembly shall enact laws classifying motor vehicles and also wheeled trailers,
semi trailers, trailer coaches, and mobile and self propelled construction equipment, prescribing
methods of determining the taxable value of such property, and requiring payment of a graduated
annual specific ownership tax thereon, which tax shall be in lieu of all ad valorem taxes upon
such
property; except that such laws shall not exempt from ad valorem taxation any such property in
process of manufacture or held in storage, or which constitutes the inventory of manufacturers or
distributors thereof or dealers therein; and further except that the general assembly shall provide
by law for the taxation of mobile homes. 

Such graduated annual specific ownership tax shall be in addition to any state registration or
license fees imposed on such property, shall be payable to a designated county officer at the same
time as any such registration or license fees are payable, and shall be apportioned, distributed,
and
paid over to the political subdivisions of the state in such manner as may be prescribed by law. 

All laws exempting from taxation property other than that specified in this article shall be void. 

[As amended by the People, November 2, 1976.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 203 009.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1978 ***

Section 9.  Vacancies   how filled. In case of a vacancy occurring in the office of county
commissioner a vacancy committee of the same political party as the vacating commissioner
constituted as provided by law shall, by a majority vote, fill the vacancy by appointment within
ten days after occurrence of the vacancy. If the vacancy committee fails to fill the vacancy within
ten days after occurrence of the vacancy, the governor shall fill the same by appointment within
fifteen days after occurrence of the vacancy. The person appointed to fill a vacancy in the office
of
county commissioner shall be a member of the same political party, if any, as the vacating
commissioner. In case of a vacancy in any other county office, or in any precinct office, the board
of county commissioners shall fill the same by appointment. Any person appointed pursuant to
this section shall hold the office until the next general election, or until the vacancy is filled by
election according to law.

[As amended November 7, 1978   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 29,
1978.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 204 030.0 002.0 0 CO 1876 1980 ***

Section 30. Right to vote or petition on annexation   enclaves. (1) No unincorporated area may be
annexed to a municipality unless one of the following conditions first has been met: 

(a) The question of annexation has been submitted to the vote of the landowners and the
registered
electors in the area proposed to be annexed, and the majority of such persons voting on the
question have voted for the annexation; or 

(b) The annexing municipality has received a petition for the annexation of such area signed by
persons comprising more than fifty percent of the landowners in the area and owning more than
fifty percent of the area, excluding public streets, and alleys and any land owned by the annexing
municipality; or 

(c) The area is entirely surrounded by or is solely owned by the annexing municipality. 

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to annexations to the city and county of Denver,
to the extent that such annexations are governed by other provisions of the constitution. 

(3) The general assembly may provide by law for procedures necessary to implement this section.
This section shall take effect upon completion of the canvass of votes taken thereon. 

[Enacted by the People November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 19, 1980.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 205 001.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1980 ***

Section 1. General assembly   initiative and referendum. (1) The legislative power of the state
shall be vested in the general assembly consisting of a senate and house of representatives, both
to
be elected by the people, but the people reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and
amendments to the constitution and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the
general assembly and also reserve power at their own option to approve or reject at the polls any
act or item, section, or part of any act of the general assembly. 

(2) The first power hereby reserved by the people is the initiative, and signatures by registered
electors in an amount equal to at least five percent of the total number of votes cast for all
candidates for the office of secretary of state at the previous general election shall be required to
propose any measure by petition, and every such petition shall include the full text of the measure
so proposed. Initiative petitions for state legislation and amendments to the constitution, in such
form as may be prescribed pursuant to law, shall be addressed to and filed with the secretary of
state at least three months before the general election at which they are to be voted upon. 

(3) The second power hereby reserved is the referendum, and it may be ordered, except as to laws
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, and
appropriations
for the support and maintenance of the departments of state and state institutions, against any act
or item, section, or part of any act of the general assembly, either by a petition signed by
registered
electors in an amount equal to at least five percent of the total number of votes cast for all
candidates for the office of the secretary of state at the previous general election or by the general
assembly. Referendum petitions, in such form as may be prescribed pursuant to law, shall be
addressed to and filed with the secretary of state not more than ninety days after the final
adjournment of the session of the general assembly that passed the bill on which the referendum
is
demanded. The filing of a referendum petition against any item, section, or part of any act shall
not delay the remainder of the act from becoming operative. 

(4) The veto power of the governor shall not extend to measures initiated by or referred to the
people. All elections on measures initiated by or referred to the people of the state shall be held at
the biennial regular general election, and all such measures shall become the law or a part of the
constitution, when approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, and not otherwise, and shall
take effect from and after the date of the official declaration of the vote thereon by proclamation
of the governor, but not later than thirty days after the vote has been canvassed. This section shall
not be construed to deprive the general assembly of the power to enact any measure. 

(5) The original draft of the text of proposed initiated constitutional amendments and initiated
laws shall be submitted to the legislative research and drafting offices of the general assembly for
review and comment. No later than two weeks after submission of the original draft, unless
withdrawn by the proponents, the legislative research and drafting offices of the general assembly
shall render their comments to the proponents of the proposed measure at a meeting open to the
public, which shall be held only after full and timely notice to the public. Such meeting shall be
held prior to the fixing of a ballot title. Neither the general assembly nor its committees or
agencies shall have any power to require the amendment, modification, or other alteration of the
text of any such proposed measure or to establish deadlines for the submission of the original
draft
of the text of any proposed measure. 

(6) The petition shall consist of sheets having such general form printed or written at the top
thereof as shall be designated or prescribed by the secretary of state; such petition shall be signed
by registered electors in their own proper persons only, to which shall be attached the residence
address of such person and the date of signing the same. To each of such petitions, which may
consist of one or more sheets, shall be attached an affidavit of some registered elector that each
signature thereon is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that, to the best
of the knowledge and belief of the affiant, each of the persons signing said petition was, at the
time of signing, a registered elector. Such petition so verified shall be prima facie evidence that
the signatures thereon are genuine and true and that the persons signing the same are registered
electors. 

(7) The text of all measures to be submitted shall be published as constitutional amendments are
published; and in submitting the same and in all matters pertaining to the form of all petitions,
the
secretary of state and all other officers shall be guided by the general laws.

(8) The style of all laws adopted by the people through the initiative shall be, "Be it Enacted by
the People of the State of Colorado". 

(9) The initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people by this section are hereby further
reserved to the registered electors of every city, town, and municipality as to all local, special,
and
municipal legislation of every character in or for their respective municipalities. The manner of
exercising said powers shall be prescribed by general laws; except that cities, towns, and
municipalities may provide for the manner of exercising the initiative and referendum powers as
to their municipal legislation. Not more than ten percent of the registered electors may be
required
to order the referendum, nor more than fifteen per cent to propose any measure by the initiative
in
any city, town, or municipality. 

(10) This section of the constitution shall be in all respects self executing; except that the form of
the initiative or referendum petition may be prescribed pursuant to law.


[As amended November 8, 1910.; as amended November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 19, 1980.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 206 002.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1980 ***

Section 2.  Lotteries prohibited   exceptions. (1)  The general assembly shall have no power to
authorize lotteries for any purpose; except that the conducting of such games of chance as
provided in subsections (2) to (4) of this section shall be lawful on and after January 1, 1959, and
the conducting of state supervised lotteries pursuant to subsection (7) of this section shall be
lawful on and after January 1, 1981. 

(2)  No game of chance pursuant to this subsection (2) and subsections (3) and (4) of this section
shall be conducted by any person, firm, or organization, unless a license as provided for in this
subsection (2) has been issued to the firm or organization conducting such games of chance. The
secretary of state shall, upon application therefor on such forms as shall be prescribed by the
secretary of state and upon the payment of an annual fee as determined by the general assembly,
issue a license for the conducting of such games of chance to any bona fide chartered branch or
lodge or chapter of a national or state organization or to any bona fide religious, charitable, labor,
fraternal, educational, voluntary firemen's or veterans' organization which operates without profit
to its members and which has been in existence continuously for a period of five years
immediately prior to the making of said application for such license and has had during the entire
five year period a dues paying membership engaged in carrying out the objects of said
corporation
or organization, such license to expire at the end of each calendar year in which it was issued. 

(3)  The license issued by the secretary of state shall authorize and permit the licensee to conduct
games of chance, restricted to the selling of rights to participate and the awarding of prizes in the
specific kind of game of chance commonly known as bingo or lotto, in which prizes are awarded
on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols
selected at random and in the specific game of chance commonly known as raffles, conducted by
the drawing of prizes or by the allotment of prizes by chance. 

(4)  Such games of chance shall be subject to the following restrictions: 

(a)  The entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of
organizations permitted to conduct such games. 

(b)  No person except a bona fide member of any organization may participate in the
management
or operation of any such game. 

(c)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or
operation of any such game. 

(5)  Subsections (2) to (4) of this section are self enacting, but laws may be enacted
supplementary to and in pursuance of, but not contrary to, the provisions thereof. 

(6)  The enforcement of this section shall be under such official or department of government of
the state of Colorado as the general assembly shall provide. 

(7)  Any provision of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, the general assembly may
establish a state supervised lottery. Unless otherwise provided by statute, all proceeds from the
lottery, after deduction of prizes and expenses, shall be allocated to the conservation trust fund of
the state for distribution to municipalities and counties for park, recreation, and open space
purposes.

[As amended November 4, 1958.; as amended November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 19, 1980.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 207 002.0 019.0 0 CO 1876 1980 ***

Section 2. Amendments to constitution   how adopted. (1) Any amendment or amendments to
this
constitution may be proposed in either house of the general assembly, and, if the same shall be
voted for by two thirds of all the members elected to each house, such proposed amendment or
amendments, together with the ayes and noes of each house thereon, shall be entered in full on
their respective journals. The proposed amendment or amendments shall be published with the
laws of that session of the general assembly. At the next general election for members of the
general assembly, the said amendment or amendments shall be submitted to the registered
electors
of the state for their approval or rejection, and such as are approved by a majority of those voting
thereon shall become part of this constitution. 

(2) If more than one amendment be submitted at any general election, each of said amendments
shall be voted upon separately and votes thereon cast shall be separately counted the same as
though but one amendment was submitted; but each general assembly shall have no power to
propose amendments to more than six articles of this constitution. 

[As amended November 6, 1900.; as amended November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 19, 1980.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 208 007.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1982 ***

Section 7. General assembly   shall meet when   term of members   committees. The general
assembly shall meet in regular session at 10 a.m. on the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of
January of each year. The general assembly shall meet at other times when convened in special
session by the governor pursuant to section 9 of article IV of this constitution or by written
request
by two thirds of the members of each house to the presiding officer of each house to consider
only
those subjects specified in such request. The term of service of the members of the general
assembly shall begin on the convening of the first regular session of the general assembly next
after their election. The committees of the general assembly, unless otherwise provided by the
general assembly, shall expire on the convening of the first regular session after a general
election.
Regular sessions of the general assembly convening in even numbered years shall not exceed one
hundred forty calender days.

[As amended November 5, 1974    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December
30, 1982.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 209 003.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1982 ***

Section 3.  Uniform taxation   exemptions. (1) (a)  Each property tax levy shall be uniform upon
all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article located within the
territorial limits of the authority levying the tax. The actual value of all real and personal property
not exempt from taxation under this article shall be determined under general laws, which shall
prescribe such methods and regulations as shall secure just and equalized valuations for
assessments of all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article.
Valuations for assessment shall be based on appraisals by assessing officers to determine the
actual value of property in accordance with provisions of law, which laws shall provide that
actual
value be determined by appropriate consideration of cost approach, market approach, and income
approach to appraisal. However, the actual value of residential real property shall be determined
solely by consideration of cost approach and market approach to appraisal; and, however, the
actual value of agricultural lands, as defined by law, shall be determined solely by consideration
of the earning or productive capacity of such lands capitalized at a rate as prescribed by law. 

(b)  Residential real property, which shall include all residential dwelling units and the land, as
defined by law, on which such units are located, and mobile home parks, but shall not include
hotels and motels, shall be valued for assessment at twenty one percent of its actual value. For
the
property tax year commencing January 1, 1985, the general assembly shall determine the
percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to residential
real property. For each subsequent year, the general assembly shall again determine the
percentage
of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to each class of taxable
property, after adding in the increased valuation for assessment attributable to new construction
and to increased volume of mineral and oil and gas production. For each year in which there is a
change in the level of value used in determining actual value, the general assembly shall adjust
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property which is set forth in this paragraph
(b) as is necessary to insure that the percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for
assessment which is attributable to residential real property shall remain the same as it was in the
year immediately preceding the year in which such change occurs. Such adjusted ratio shall be
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property for those years for which such new
level of value is used.  However, the valuation for assessment for producing mines, as defined by
law, and lands or leaseholds producing oil or gas, as defined by law, shall be a portion of the
actual annual or actual average annual production therefrom, based upon the value of the
unprocessed material, according to procedures prescribed by law for different types of minerals.

(c)  The following classes of personal property, as defined by law, shall be exempt from property
taxation: Household furnishings and personal effects which are not used for the production of
income at any time; inventories of merchandise and materials and supplies which are held for
consumption by a business or are held primarily for sale; livestock; agricultural and livestock
products; and agricultural equipment which is used on the farm or ranch in the production of
agricultural products. 

(d)  Ditches, canals, and flumes owned and used by individuals or corporations for irrigating land
owned by such individuals or corporations, or the individual members thereof, shall not be
separately taxed so long as they shall be owned and used exclusively for such purposes. 

(2) (a)  During each property tax year beginning with the property tax year which commences
January 1, 1983, the general assembly shall cause a valuation for assessment study to be
conducted. Such study shall determine whether or not the assessor of each county has complied
with the property tax provisions of this constitution and of the statutes in valuing property and
has
determined the actual value and valuation for assessment of each and every class of taxable real
and personal property consistent with such provisions. Such study shall sample at least one
percent of each and every class of taxable real and personal property in the county. 

(b) (I)  If the study conducted during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1983,
shows that a county assessor did not comply with the property tax provisions of this constitution
or the statutes or did not determine the actual value or the valuation for assessment of any class
or
classes of taxable real and personal property consistent with such provisions, the state board of
equalization shall, during such year, order such county assessor to reappraise during the property
tax year which commences January 1, 1984, such class or classes for such year. Such reappraisal
shall be performed at the expense of the county. 

(II)  If the study performed during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1984,
shows
that the county assessor failed to reappraise such class or classes as ordered or failed in his
reappraisal to meet the objections of the state board of equalization, the state board of
equalization
shall cause a reappraisal of such class or classes to be performed in the property tax year which
commences January 1, 1985. The cost of such reappraisal shall be paid by the state by an
appropriation authorized by law. However, if such reappraisal shows that the county assessor did
not value or assess taxable property as prescribed by the provisions of this constitution or of the
statutes, upon certification to the board of county commissioners by the state board of
equalization
of the cost thereof, the board of county commissioners shall pay to the state the cost of such
reappraisal. 

(III)  The reappraisal performed in the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, shall
become the county's abstract for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for
such year. The state board of equalization shall order the county's board of county commissioners
to levy, and the board of county commissioners shall levy, in 1985 an additional property tax on
all taxable property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county
commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess payment made by the state to school districts
within the county during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985. 

(c) (I)  Beginning with the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, and applicable
to
each property tax year thereafter, the annual study conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
subsection (2) shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in paragraph (a) of this subsection
(2), set forth the aggregate valuation for assessment of each county for the year in which the
study
is conducted. 

(II)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study,
during the next following year, the state board of equalization shall cause to be performed, at the
expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which the study
shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this constitution or the
statutes. The state board of equalization shall cause to be performed during the next following
year, at the expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which
the study shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this
constitution
or the statutes even though the county's aggregate valuation for assessment as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment was not more than five percent below the county's aggregate
valuation for assessment as determined by the study. The reappraisal shall become the county's
valuation for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for the year in which the
reappraisal was performed. 

(III)  In any case in which a reappraisal is ordered, state equalization payments to school districts
within the county during the year in which the reappraisal is performed shall be based upon the
valuation for assessment as reflected in the county's abstract for assessment. The state board of
equalization shall also order the board of county commissioners of the county to impose, and the
board of county commissioners shall impose, at the time of imposition of property taxes during
such year an additional property tax on all taxable property within the county in an amount
sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess
payments made by the state to school districts within the county during the year in which such
reappraisal was performed plus interest thereon at a rate and for such time as are prescribed by
law. 

(IV)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study
and if the state board of equalization fails to order a reappraisal, state equalization payments to
school districts within the county during the year following the year in which the study was
conducted shall be based upon the valuation for assessment for the county as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment. The board of county commissioners of such county shall impose
in the year in which such school payments are made an additional property tax on all taxable
property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners
shall repay, the state for the difference between the amount the state actually paid in state
equalization payments during such year and what the state would have paid during such year had
such state payments been based on the valuation for assessment as determined by the study.

[As amended November 6, 1956.; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 30, 1982.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 210 015.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1982 ***

Section 15.  Boards of equalization   duties   property tax administrator. (1) (a)  There shall be in
each county of the state a county board of equalization, consisting of the board of county
commissioners of said county. As may be prescribed by law, the county boards of equalization
shall raise, lower, adjust, and equalize valuations for assessment of taxes upon real and personal
property located within their respective counties, subject to review and revision by the state
board
of equalization. 

(b)  There shall be a state board of equalization, consisting of the governor or his designee, the
speaker of the house of representatives or his designee, the president of the senate or his
designee,
and two members appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate. Each of such
appointed members shall be a qualified appraiser or a former county assessor or a person who has
knowledge and experience in property taxation. The general assembly shall provide by law for
the
political composition of such board and for the compensation of its members and, with regard to
the appointed members, for terms of office, the filling of vacancies, and removal from office. As
may be prescribed by law, the state board of equalization shall review the valuations determined
for assessment of taxes upon the various classes of real and personal property located in the
several counties of the state and shall, upon a majority vote, raise, lower, and adjust the same to
the end that all valuations for assessment of taxes shall be just and equalized; except that said
state board of equalization shall have no power of original assessment. Whenever a majority vote
of the state board of equalization is prescribed by this constitution or by statute, "majority vote"
means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire membership of such board. 

(c)  The state board of equalization and the county boards of equalization shall perform such
other
duties as may be prescribed by law. 

(2)  The state board of equalization shall appoint, by a majority vote, a property tax administrator
who shall serve for a term of five years and until his successor is appointed and qualified unless
removed for cause by a majority vote of the state board of equalization. The property tax
administrator shall have the duty, as provided by law, of administering the property tax laws and
such other duties as may be prescribed by law and shall be subject to the supervision and control
of the state board of equalization. The position of property tax administrator shall be exempt
from
the personnel system of this state.

[As amended November 3, 1914; November 6, 1962.; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective
upon proclamation of the Governor, December 30, 1982.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 211 019.0 002.0 0 CO 1876 1983 ***

Section 19. Right to bail   exceptions. (1) All persons shall be bailable by sufficient sureties
except: 

(a) For capital offenses when proof is evident or presumption is great; or 

(b) When, after a hearing held within ninety six hours of arrest and upon reasonable notice, the
court finds that proof is evident or presumption is great as to the crime alleged to have been
committed and finds that the public would be placed in significant peril if the accused were
released on bail and such person is accused in any of the following cases: 

(I) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed while on probation or parole resulting from the conviction of a crime of violence; 

(II) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed while on bail pending the disposition of a previous crime of violence charge for
which
probable cause has been found; 

(III) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed after two previous felony convictions, or one such previous felony conviction if such
conviction was for a crime of violence, upon charges separately brought and tried under the laws
of this state or under the laws of any other state, the United States, or any territory subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States which, if committed in this state, would be a felony 

(c) When a person has been convicted of a crime of violence at the trial court level, and such a
person is appealing such conviction or awaiting sentencing for such conviction, and the court
finds that the public would be placed in significant peril if the convicted person were released on
bail. 

(2) Except in the case of a capital offense, if a person is denied bail under this section, the trial of
the person shall be commenced not more than ninety days after the date on which bail is denied.
If
the trial is not commenced within ninety days and the delay is not attributable to the defense, the
court shall immediately schedule a bail hearing and shall set the amount of the bail for the
person. 

(3) This section shall take effect January 1, 1983, and shall apply to offenses committed on or
after said date. 

[ Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 2, 1982    Effective January 1, 1983.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 212 003.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 3. State officers   election   returns. The officers named in section one of this article shall
be chosen on the day of the general election, by the registered electors of the state. The governor
and the lieutenant governor shall be chosen jointly by the casting by each voter of a single vote
applicable to both offices. The returns of every election for said officers shall be sealed up and
transmitted to the secretary of state, directed to the speaker of the house of representatives, who
shall immediately, upon the organization of the house, and before proceeding to other business,
open and publish the same in the presence of a majority of the members of both houses of the
general assembly, who shall for that purpose assemble in the house of representatives. The joint
candidates having the highest number of votes cast for governor and lieutenant governor, and the
person having the highest number of votes for any other office, shall be declared duly elected, but
if two or more have an equal and the highest number of votes for the same office or offices, one
of
them, or any two for whom joint votes were cast for governor and lieutenant governor
respectively, shall be chosen thereto by the two houses, on joint ballot. Contested elections for
the
said offices shall be determined by the two houses, on joint ballot, in such manner as may be
prescribed by law. 

[As amended November 5, 1968. (See Laws 1967, p. 1083.); as amended November 6, 1984   
Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14, 1985.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 213 023.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 23. Commissioner of insurance. The governor shall nominate and, by and with the
consent of the senate, appoint the commissioner of insurance to serve at his pleasure, and the
state
personnel system shall not extend to the commissioner of insurance. 

[Adopted November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14, 1985.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 214 050.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 50. Public funding of abortion forbidden. 

No public funds shall be used by the State of Colorado, its agencies or political subdivisions to
pay or otherwise reimburse, either directly or indirectly, any person, agency or facility for the
performance of any induced abortion, PROVIDED HOWEVER, that the General Assembly, by
specific bill, may authorize and appropriate funds to be used for those medical services necessary
to prevent the death of either a pregnant woman or her unborn child under circumstances where
every reasonable effort is made to preserve the life of each. 

[Adopted by the People November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 215 002.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 2. Removal of county seats. The general assembly shall have no power to remove the
county seat of any county, but the removal of county seats shall be provided for by general law,
and no county seat shall be removed unless a majority of the registered electors of the county,
voting on the proposition at a general election vote therefor; and no such proposition shall be
submitted oftener than once in four years, and no person shall vote on such proposition who shall
not have resided in the county six months and in the election precinct ninety days next preceding
such election.

[As amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 216 003.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 3.  Striking off territory   vote. Except as otherwise provided by statute, no part of the
territory of any county shall be stricken off and added to an adjoining county, without first
submitting the question to the registered electors of the county from which the territory is
proposed to be stricken off; nor unless a majority of all the registered electors of said county
voting on the question shall vote therefor.

[As amended by the People November 5, 1974    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 20, 1974; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 217 016.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 16.  County home rule. (1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6, 8, 9, 10, 12,
and
15 of this article, the registered electors of each county of the state are hereby vested with the
power to adopt a home rule charter establishing the organization and structure of county
government consistent with this article and statutes enacted pursuant hereto. 

(2)  The general assembly shall provide by statute procedures under which the registered electors
of any county may adopt, amend, and repeal a county home rule charter. Action to initiate home
rule may be by petition, signed by not less than five percent of the registered electors of the
county
in which home rule is sought, or by any other procedure authorized by statute. No county home
rule charter, amendment thereto, or repeal thereof, shall become effective until approved by a
majority of the registered electors of such county voting thereon. 

(3)  A home rule county shall provide all mandatory county functions, services, and facilities and
shall exercise all mandatory powers as may be required by statute. 

(4)  A home rule county shall be empowered to provide such permissive functions, services, and
facilities and to exercise such permissive powers as may be authorized by statute applicable to all
home rule counties, except as may be otherwise prohibited or limited by charter or this
constitution. 

(5)  The provisions of sections 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, and 15 of article XIV of this constitution shall
apply
to counties adopting a home rule charter only to such extent as may be provided in said charter.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.; (1) and (2) amended November 6,
1984    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 218 017.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 17.  Service authorities. (1) (a)  The general assembly shall provide by statute for the
organization, structure, functions, services, facilities, and powers of service authorities pursuant
to
the following requirements: 

(b)  A service authority may be formed only upon the approval of a majority of the registered
electors voting thereon in the territory to be included. 

(c)  The territory within a service authority may include all or part of one county or home rule
county or all or part of two or more adjoining counties or home rule counties, but shall not
include
only a part of any city and county, home rule city or town, or statutory city or town at the time of
formation of the service authority. No more than one service authority shall be established in any
territory and, in no event, shall a service authority be formed in the metropolitan area composed
of
the city and county of Denver, and Adams, Arapahoe, and Jefferson counties which does not
include all of the city and county of Denver and all or portions of Adams, Arapahoe, and
Jefferson
counties. 

(d)  The boundaries of any service authority shall not be such as to create any enclave. 

(e)  No territory shall be included within the boundaries of more than one service authority. 

(2) (a)  The general assembly shall also provide by statute for: 

(b)  The inclusion and exclusion of territory in or from a service authority; 

(c)  The dissolution of a service authority; 

(d)  The merger of all or a part of two or more adjacent service authorities, except that such
merger shall require the approval of a majority of the registered electors voting thereon in each of
the affected service authorities; and, 

(e)  The boundaries of any service authority or any special taxing districts therein or the method
by which such boundaries are to be determined or changed; and 

(f)  The method for payment of any election expenses. 

(3) (a)  The general assembly shall designate by statute the functions, services, and facilities
which
may be provided by a service authority, and the manner in which the members of the governing
body of any service authority shall be elected from compact districts of approximately equal
population by the registered electors of the authority, including the terms and qualifications of
such members; but for the first five years after formation of any service authority, the members
of
the governing body shall be elected by the registered electors within the boundaries of the
authority from among the mayors, councilmen, trustees, and county commissioners holding
office
at the time of their election in home rule and statutory cities, cities and counties, home rule and
statutory towns, and home rule and statutory counties located within or partially within the
authority. This restriction shall expire January 1, 1980. The general assembly may provide that
members of the governing body may be elected by a vote of each compact district or by an at
large
vote or combination thereof. Notwithstanding any provision in this constitution or the charter of
any home rule city and county, city, town, or county to the contrary, mayors, councilmen,
trustees,
and county commissioners may additionally hold elective office with a service authority and
serve
therein either with or without compensation, as provided by statute. 

(b)  A service authority shall provide any function, service, or facility designated by statute and
authorized as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this subsection. 

(c)  All propositions to provide functions, services, or facilities shall be submitted, either
individually or jointly, to the registered electors in the manner and form prescribed by law. 

(d)  Each such function, service, or facility shall be authorized if approved by a majority of the
registered electors of the authority voting thereon; but if the service authority includes territory in
more than one county, approval shall also require a majority of the registered electors of the
authority voting thereon in those included portions of each of the affected counties. 

(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this subsection, where, upon
formation of a service authority, any function, service, or facility is already being provided in at
least four counties or portions thereof by a single special district, regional planning commission
or
metropolitan council, or an association of political subdivisions, the general assembly may
provide, without a vote of the registered electors, for assumption by one or more service
authorities of such function, service, or facility. 

(f)  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this subsection, a service
authority may contract with any other political subdivision to provide or receive any function,
service, or facility designated by statute; but a service authority shall not be invested with any
taxing power as a consequence of such contract. 

(4) (a)  A service authority shall be a body corporate and a political subdivision of the state. 

(b)  Any other provision of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, any service authority
formed under this article and the statutes pursuant thereto may exercise such powers to
accomplish the purposes and to provide the authorized functions, services, and facilities of such
authority as the general assembly may provide by statute. 

(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of article XX of this constitution, any authorized function,
service, or facility may be provided exclusively by the authority or concurrently with other
jurisdictions as may be prescribed by statute, subject to the provisions of subsections (3) (c), (3)
(d), (3) (e), and (3) (f) of this section.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.; (1)(b), (2)(d), (3)(a), (3)(c), (3)(d), and
(3)(e) amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14,
1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 219 004.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 4.  First charter.  The charter and ordinances of the city of Denver as the same shall exist
when this amendment takes effect, shall, for the time being only, and as far as applicable, be the
charter and ordinances of the city and county of Denver; but the people of the city and county of
Denver are hereby vested with and they shall always have the exclusive power in the making,
altering, revising or amending their charter and, within ten days after the proclamation of the
governor announcing the adoption of this amendment the council of the city and county of
Denver
shall, by ordinance, call a special election, to be conducted as provided by law, of the qualified
electors in said city and county of Denver, for the election of twenty one taxpayers who shall
have
been qualified electors within the limits thereof for at least five years, who shall constitute a
charter convention to frame a charter for said city and county in harmony with this amendment.
Immediately upon completion, the charter so framed, with a prefatory synopsis, shall be signed
by
the officers and members of the convention and delivered to the clerk of said city and county who
shall publish the same in full, with his official certification, in the official newspaper of said city
and county, three times, and a week apart, the first publication being with the call for a special
election, at which the qualified electors of said city and county shall by vote express their
approval or rejection of the said charter. If the said charter shall be approved by a majority of
those voting thereon, then two copies thereof (together with the vote for and against) duly
certified
by the said clerk, shall, within ten days after such vote is taken, be filed with the secretary of
state,
and shall thereupon become and be the charter of the city and county of Denver. But if the said
charter be rejected, then, within thirty days thereafter, twenty one members of a new charter
convention shall be elected at a special election to be called as above in said city and county, and
they shall proceed as above to frame a charter, which shall in like manner and to the like end be
published and submitted to a vote of said voters for their approval or rejection. If again rejected,
the procedure herein designated shall be repeated (each special election for members of a new
charter convention being within thirty days after each rejection) until a charter is finally approved
by a majority of those voting thereon, and certified (together with the vote for and against) to the
secretary of state as aforesaid, whereupon it shall become the charter of the said city and county
of
Denver and shall become the organic law thereof, and supersede any existing charters and
amendments thereof. The members of each of said charter conventions shall be elected at large;
and they shall complete their labors within sixty days after their respective election. 

     Every ordinance for a special election of charter convention members shall fix the time
and place where the convention shall be held, and shall specify the compensation, if any, to be
paid the officers and members thereof, allowing no compensation in case of non attendance or
tardy attendance, and shall fix the time when the vote shall be taken on the proposed charter, to
be
not less than thirty days nor more than sixty days after its delivery to the clerk. The charter shall
make proper provision for continuing, amending or repealing the ordinances of the city and
county
of Denver. 

     All expenses of charter conventions shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the
president and secretary thereof. The expenses of elections for charter conventions and of charter
votes shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the council. 

     No franchise relating to any street, alley or public place of said city and county shall be
granted except upon the vote of the registered electors, and the question of its being granted shall
be submitted to such vote upon deposit with the treasurer of the expense (to be determined by
said
treasurer) of such submission by the applicant for said franchise.  The council shall have power
to
fix the rate of taxation on property each year for city and county purposes.

[Added November 4, 1902.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 220 009.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 9.  Procedure and requirements for adoption. (1)  Notwithstanding any provision in
sections 4, 5, and 6 of this article to the contrary, the registered electors of each city and county,
city, and town of the state are hereby vested with the power to adopt, amend, and repeal a home
rule charter. 

(2)  The general assembly shall provide by statute procedures under which the registered electors
of any proposed or existing city and county, city, or town may adopt, amend, and repeal a
municipal home rule charter. Action to initiate home rule shall be by petition, signed by not less
than five percent of the registered electors of the proposed or existing city and county, city, or
town, or by proper ordinance by the city council or board of trustees of a town, submitting the
question of the adoption of a municipal home rule charter to the registered electors of the city and
county, city, or town. No municipal home rule charter, amendment thereto, or repeal thereof,
shall
become effective until approved by a majority of the registered electors of such city and county,
city, or town voting thereon. A new city or town may acquire home rule status at the time of its
incorporation. 

(3)  The provisions of this article as they existed prior to the effective date of this section, as they
relate to procedures for the initial adoption of home rule charters and for the amendment of
existing home rule charters, shall continue to apply until superseded by statute. 

(4)  It is the purpose of this section to afford to the people of all cities, cities and counties, and
towns the right to home rule regardless of population, period of incorporation, or other limitation,
and for this purpose this section shall be self executing. It is the further purpose of this section to
facilitate adoption and amendment of home rule through such procedures as may hereafter be
enacted by the general assembly.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective January 1, 1972.; (1) and (2) amended November 6,
1984    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 221 001.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 1.  State officers may be recalled. Every elective public officer of the state of Colorado
may be recalled from office at any time by the registered electors entitled to vote for a successor
of such incumbent through the procedure and in the manner herein provided for, which procedure
shall be known as the recall, and shall be in addition to and without excluding any other method
of removal provided by law. 

The procedure hereunder to effect the recall of an elective public officer shall be as follows: 

A petition signed by registered electors entitled to vote for a successor of the incumbent sought to
be recalled, equal in number to twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding
election for all candidates for the position which the incumbent sought to be recalled occupies,
demanding an election of the successor to the officer named in said petition, shall be filed in the
office in which petitions for nominations to office held by the incumbent sought to be recalled
are
required to be filed; provided, if more than one person is required by law to be elected to fill the
office of which the person sought to be recalled is an incumbent, then the said petition shall be
signed by registered electors entitled to vote for a successor to the incumbent sought to be
recalled
equal in number to twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding general
election
for all candidates for the office, to which the incumbent sought to be recalled was elected as one
of the officers thereof, said entire vote being divided by the number of all officers elected to such
office, at the last preceding general election; and such petition shall contain a general statement,
in
not more than two hundred words, of the ground or grounds on which such recall is sought,
which
statement is intended for the information of the registered electors, and the registered electors
shall be the sole and exclusive judges of the legality, reasonableness and sufficiency of such
ground or grounds assigned for such recall, and said ground or grounds shall not be open to
review.


[Added November 5, 1912.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 222 002.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 2.  Form of recall petition. Any recall petition may be circulated and signed in sections,
provided each section shall contain a full and accurate copy of the title and text of the petition;
and such recall petition shall be filed in the office in which petitions for nominations to office
held
by the incumbent sought to be recalled are required to be filed. 

The signatures to such recall petition need not all be on one sheet of paper, but each signer must
add to his signature the date of his signing said petition, and his place of residence, giving his
street number, if any, should he reside in a town or city. The person circulating such sheet must
make and subscribe an oath on said sheet that the signatures thereon are genuine, and a false
oath,
willfully so made and subscribed by such person, shall be perjury and be punished as such. All
petitions shall be deemed and held to be sufficient if they appear to be signed by the requisite
number of signers, and such signers shall be deemed and held to be registered electors, unless a
protest in writing under oath shall be filed in the office in which such petition has been filed, by
some registered elector, within fifteen days after such petition is filed, setting forth specifically
the
grounds of such protest, whereupon the officer with whom such petition is filed shall forthwith
mail a copy of such protest to the person or persons named in such petition as representing the
signers thereof, together with a notice fixing a time for hearing such protest not less than five nor
more than ten days after such notice is mailed. All hearings shall be before the officer with whom
such protest is filed, and all testimony shall be under oath. Such hearings shall be summary and
not subject to delay, and must be concluded within thirty days after such petition is filed, and the
result thereof shall be forthwith certified to the person or persons representing the signers of such
petition. In case the petition is not sufficient it may be withdrawn by the person or a majority of
the persons representing the signers of such petition, and may, within fifteen days thereafter, be
amended and refiled as an original petition. The finding as to the sufficiency of any petition may
be reviewed by any state court of general jurisdiction in the county in which such petition is filed,
upon application of the person or a majority of the persons representing the signers of such
petition, but such review shall be had and determined forthwith. The sufficiency, or the
determination of the sufficiency, of the petition referred to in this section shall not be held, or
construed, to refer to the ground or grounds assigned in such petition for the recall of the
incumbent sought to be recalled from office thereby. 

When such petition is sufficient, the officer with whom such recall petition was filed, shall
forthwith submit said petition, together with a certificate of its sufficiency to the governor, who
shall thereupon order and fix the date for holding the election not less than thirty days nor more
than sixty days from the date of submission of said petition; provided, if a general election is to
be
held within ninety days after the date of submission of said petition, the recall election shall be
held as part of said general election.

[Added November 5, 1912.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 223 004.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1985 ***

Section 4.  Limitation   municipal corporations may adopt, when. No recall petition shall be
circulated or filed against any officer until he has actually held his office for at least six months,
save and except it may be filed against any member of the state legislature at any time after five
days from the convening and organizing of the legislature after his election. 

After one recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed against the same officer
during the term for which he was elected, unless the petitioners signing said petition shall equal
fifty percent of the votes cast at the last preceding general election for all of the candidates for the
office held by such officer as herein above defined. 

If at any recall election the incumbent whose recall is sought is not recalled, he shall be repaid
from the state treasury any money authorized by law and actually expended by him as expenses
of
said election; and the legislature shall provide appropriations for such purpose.

If the governor is sought to be recalled under the provisions of this article, the duties herein
imposed upon him shall be performed by the lieutenant governor; and if the secretary of state is
sought to be recalled, the duties herein imposed upon him, shall be performed by the state
auditor. 

The recall may also be exercised by the registered electors of each county, city and county, city
and town of the state, with reference to the elective officers thereof, under such procedure as
shall
be provided by law. 

Until otherwise provided by law, the legislative body of any such county, city and county, city
and
town may provide for the manner of exercising such recall powers in such counties, cities and
counties, cities and towns, but shall not require any such recall to be signed by registered electors
more in number than twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding election, as
in
section 1 hereof more particularly set forth, for all the candidates for office which the incumbent
sought to be recalled occupies, as herein above defined. 

Every person having authority to exercise or exercising any public or governmental duty, power
or
function, shall be an elective officer, or one appointed, drawn or designated in accordance with
law by an elective officer or officers, or by some board, commission, person or persons legally
appointed by an elective officer or officers, each of which said elective officers shall be subject to
the recall provision of this constitution; provided, that, subject to regulation by law, any person
may, without compensation therefor, file petitions, or complaints in courts concerning crimes, or
do police duty only in cases of immediate danger to person or property. 

Nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting or limiting the present or future powers
of cities and counties or cities having charters adopted under the authority given by the
constitution, except as in the last three preceding paragraphs expressed. 

In the submission to the electors of any petition proposed under this article, all officers shall be
guided by the general laws of the state, except as otherwise herein provided. 

This article is self executing, but legislation may be enacted to facilitate its operations, but in no
way limiting or restricting the provisions of this article, or the powers herein reserved.

[Added November 5, 1912.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 224 004.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1986 ***

Section 4.  First charter. (1)  The charter and ordinances of the city of Denver as the same shall
exist when this amendment takes effect, shall, for the time being only, and as far as applicable, be
the charter and ordinances of the city and county of Denver; but the people of the city and county
of Denver are hereby vested with and they shall always have the exclusive power in the making,
altering, revising or amending their charter and, within ten days after the proclamation of the
governor announcing the adoption of this amendment the council of the city and county of
Denver
shall, by ordinance, call a special election, to be conducted as provided by law, of the qualified
electors in said city and county of Denver, for the election of twenty one taxpayers who shall
have
been qualified electors within the limits thereof for at least five years, who shall constitute a
charter convention to frame a charter for said city and county in harmony with this amendment.
Immediately upon completion, the charter so framed, with a prefatory synopsis, shall be signed
by
the officers and members of the convention and delivered to the clerk of said city and county who
shall publish the same in full, with his official certification, in the official newspaper of said city
and county, three times, and a week apart, the first publication being with the call for a special
election, at which the qualified electors of said city and county shall by vote express their
approval or rejection of the said charter. If the said charter shall be approved by a majority of
those voting thereon, then two copies thereof (together with the vote for and against) duly
certified
by the said clerk, shall, within ten days after such vote is taken, be filed with the secretary of
state,
and shall thereupon become and be the charter of the city and county of Denver. But if the said
charter be rejected, then, within thirty days thereafter, twenty one members of a new charter
convention shall be elected at a special election to be called as above in said city and county, and
they shall proceed as above to frame a charter, which shall in like manner and to the like end be
published and submitted to a vote of said voters for their approval or rejection. If again rejected,
the procedure herein designated shall be repeated (each special election for members of a new
charter convention being within thirty days after each rejection) until a charter is finally approved
by a majority of those voting thereon, and certified (together with the vote for and against) to the
secretary of state as aforesaid, whereupon it shall become the charter of the said city and county
of
Denver and shall become the organic law thereof, and supersede any existing charters and
amendments thereof. The members of each of said charter conventions shall be elected at large;
and they shall complete their labors within sixty days after their respective election. 

(2)  Every ordinance for a special election of charter convention members shall fix the time and
place where the convention shall be held, and shall specify the compensation, if any, to be paid
the
officers and members thereof, allowing no compensation in case of non attendance or tardy
attendance, and shall fix the time when the vote shall be taken on the proposed charter, to be not
less than thirty days nor more than sixty days after its delivery to the clerk. The charter shall
make
proper provision for continuing, amending or repealing the ordinances of the city and county of
Denver. 

(3)  All expenses of charter conventions shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the
president and secretary thereof. The expenses of elections for charter conventions and of charter
votes shall be paid out of the treasury upon the order of the council. 

(4)  Any franchise relating to any street, alley, or public place of the said city and county shall be
subject to the initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people under section 1 of article V
of this constitution. Such referendum power shall be guaranteed notwithstanding a recital in an
ordinance granting such franchise that such ordinance is necessary for the immediate
preservation
of the public peace, health, and safety. Not more than five percent of the registered electors of a
home rule city shall be required to order such referendum. Nothing in this section shall preclude
a
home rule charter provision which requires a lesser number of registered electors to order such
referendum or which requires a franchise to be voted on by the registered electors. If such a
referendum is ordered to be submitted to the registered electors, the grantee of such franchise
shall
deposit with the treasurer the expense (to be determined by said treasurer) of such submission.
The council shall have power to fix the rate of taxation on property each year for city and county
purposes.

[Added November 4, 1902.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.; as amended November 4, 1986    Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 17, 1986.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 225 030.A 002.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 30a. Official language. The English language is the official language of the State of
Colorado. 

This section is self executing; however, the General Assembly may enact laws to implement this
section. 

[Enacted by the People November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1989.] 
               
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 226 007.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 7. General assembly   shall meet when   term of members   committees. The general
assembly shall meet in regular session at 10 a.m. no later than the second Wednesday of January
of each year. The general assembly shall meet at other times when convened in special session by
the governor pursuant to section 9 of article IV of this constitution or by written request by
two thirds of the members of each house to the presiding officer of each house to consider only
those subjects specified in such request. The term of service of the members of the general
assembly shall begin on the convening of the first regular session of the general assembly next
after their election. The committees of the general assembly, unless otherwise provided by the
general assembly, shall expire on the convening of the first regular session after a general
election.
Regular sessions of the general assembly shall not exceed one hundred twenty calendar days. 

[As amended November 5, 1974    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December
30, 1982.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1989.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 227 020.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 20. Bills referred to committee   printed. No bill shall be considered or become a law
unless referred to a committee, returned therefrom, and printed for the use of the members. Every
measure referred to a committee of reference of either house shall be considered by the
committee
upon its merits, and no rule of either house shall deny the opportunity for consideration and vote
by a committee of reference upon such a measure within appropriate deadlines. A motion that the
committee report the measure favorably to the committee of the whole, with or without
amendments, shall always be in order within appropriate deadlines. Each measure reported to the
committee of the whole shall appear on the appropriate house calendar in the order in which it
was reported out of the committee of reference and within appropriate deadlines. 

[As amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 228 022.A 005.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 22a. Caucus positions prohibited   penalties. (1) No member or members of the general
assembly shall require or commit themselves or any other member or members, through a vote in
a party caucus or any other similar procedure, to vote in favor of or against any bill, appointment,
veto, or other measure or issue pending or proposed to be introduced in the general assembly. 

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, a member or members of the
general assembly may vote in party caucus on matters directly relating to the selection of officers
of a party caucus and the selection of the leadership of the general assembly. 

[Adopted by the People November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1989. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 229 022.B 005.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 22b. Effect of sections 20 and 22a. Any action taken in violation of section 20 or 22a of
this constitution shall be null and void. 

Adopted by the People November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 230 025.A 005.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 25a. Eight hour employment. (1) The general assembly shall provide by law, and shall
prescribe suitable penalties for the violation thereof, for a period of employment not to exceed
eight (8) hours within any twenty four (24) hours (except in cases of emergency where life or
property is in imminent danger) for persons employed in underground mines or other
underground
workings, blast furnaces, smelters; and any ore reduction works or other branch of industry or
labor that the general assembly may consider injurious or dangerous to health, life or limb. 

(2) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the general
assembly may establish whatever exceptions it deems appropriate to the eight hour workday. 

[Adopted November 4, 1902.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, January 3, 1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 231 001.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 1.  Qualifications of elector. Every citizen of the United States who has attained the age
of
eighteen years, has resided in this state not less than one year next preceding the election at
which
he offers to vote and in the county, city, town, ward, or precinct such time as may be prescribed
by
law, and has been duly registered as a voter if required by law shall be qualified to vote at all
elections; except that the general assembly may by law extend to citizens of the United States
who
have resided in this state less than one year the right to vote for presidential and vice presidential
electors.

[As amended November 4, 1902; November 6, 1962.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective
upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 232 002.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 2.  Suffrage to women.

[Repealed November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 233 002.0 008.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 2.  Seat of government   where located. The general assembly shall have no power to
change or to locate the seat of government of the state, which shall remain at the city and county
of Denver. 

[As amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 234 004.0 008.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 4.  Appropriation for capitol building.

[Repealed November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1989.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 235 003.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 3.  Uniform taxation   exemptions. (1) (a)  Each property tax levy shall be uniform upon
all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article located within the
territorial limits of the authority levying the tax. The actual value of all real and personal property
not exempt from taxation under this article shall be determined under general laws, which shall
prescribe such methods and regulations as shall secure just and equalized valuations for
assessments of all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article.
Valuations for assessment shall be based on appraisals by assessing officers to determine the
actual value of property in accordance with provisions of law, which laws shall provide that
actual
value be determined by appropriate consideration of cost approach, market approach, and income
approach to appraisal. However, the actual value of residential real property shall be determined
solely by consideration of cost approach and market approach to appraisal; and, however, the
actual value of agricultural lands, as defined by law, shall be determined solely by consideration
of the earning or productive capacity of such lands capitalized at a rate as prescribed by law. 

(b)  Residential real property, which shall include all residential dwelling units and the land, as
defined by law, on which such units are located, and mobile home parks, but shall not include
hotels and motels, shall be valued for assessment at twenty one percent of its actual value. For
the
property tax year commencing January 1, 1985, the general assembly shall determine the
percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to residential
real property. For each subsequent year, the general assembly shall again determine the
percentage
of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to each class of taxable
property, after adding in the increased valuation for assessment attributable to new construction
and to increased volume of mineral and oil and gas production. For each year in which there is a
change in the level of value used in determining actual value, the general assembly shall adjust
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property which is set forth in this paragraph
(b) as is necessary to insure that the percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for
assessment which is attributable to residential real property shall remain the same as it was in the
year immediately preceding the year in which such change occurs. Such adjusted ratio shall be
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property for those years for which such new
level of value is used.  However, the valuation for assessment for producing mines, as defined by
law, and lands or leaseholds producing oil or gas, as defined by law, shall be a portion of the
actual annual or actual average annual production therefrom, based upon the value of the
unprocessed material, according to procedures prescribed by law for different types of minerals.
Non producing unpatented mining claims, which are possessory interests in real property by
virtue
of leases from the United States of America, shall be exempt from property taxation. 

(c)  The following classes of personal property, as defined by law, shall be exempt from property
taxation: Household furnishings and personal effects which are not used for the production of
income at any time; inventories of merchandise and materials and supplies which are held for
consumption by a business or are held primarily for sale; livestock; agricultural and livestock
products; and agricultural equipment which is used on the farm or ranch in the production of
agricultural products. 

(d)  Ditches, canals, and flumes owned and used by individuals or corporations for irrigating land
owned by such individuals or corporations, or the individual members thereof, shall not be
separately taxed so long as they shall be owned and used exclusively for such purposes. 

(2) (a)  During each property tax year beginning with the property tax year which commences
January 1, 1983, the general assembly shall cause a valuation for assessment study to be
conducted. Such study shall determine whether or not the assessor of each county has complied
with the property tax provisions of this constitution and of the statutes in valuing property and
has
determined the actual value and valuation for assessment of each and every class of taxable real
and personal property consistent with such provisions. Such study shall sample at least one
percent of each and every class of taxable real and personal property in the county. 

(b) (I)  If the study conducted during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1983,
shows that a county assessor did not comply with the property tax provisions of this constitution
or the statutes or did not determine the actual value or the valuation for assessment of any class
or
classes of taxable real and personal property consistent with such provisions, the state board of
equalization shall, during such year, order such county assessor to reappraise during the property
tax year which commences January 1, 1984, such class or classes for such year. Such reappraisal
shall be performed at the expense of the county. 

(II)  If the study performed during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1984,
shows
that the county assessor failed to reappraise such class or classes as ordered or failed in his
reappraisal to meet the objections of the state board of equalization, the state board of
equalization
shall cause a reappraisal of such class or classes to be performed in the property tax year which
commences January 1, 1985. The cost of such reappraisal shall be paid by the state by an
appropriation authorized by law. However, if such reappraisal shows that the county assessor did
not value or assess taxable property as prescribed by the provisions of this constitution or of the
statutes, upon certification to the board of county commissioners by the state board of
equalization
of the cost thereof, the board of county commissioners shall pay to the state the cost of such
reappraisal. 

(III)  The reappraisal performed in the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, shall
become the county's abstract for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for
such year. The state board of equalization shall order the county's board of county commissioners
to levy, and the board of county commissioners shall levy, in 1985 an additional property tax on
all taxable property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county
commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess payment made by the state to school districts
within the county during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985. 

(c) (I)  Beginning with the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, and applicable
to
each property tax year thereafter, the annual study conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
subsection (2) shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in paragraph (a) of this subsection
(2), set forth the aggregate valuation for assessment of each county for the year in which the
study
is conducted. 

(II)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study,
during the next following year, the state board of equalization shall cause to be performed, at the
expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which the study
shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this constitution or the
statutes. The state board of equalization shall cause to be performed during the next following
year, at the expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which
the study shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this
constitution
or the statutes even though the county's aggregate valuation for assessment as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment was not more than five percent below the county's aggregate
valuation for assessment as determined by the study. The reappraisal shall become the county's
valuation for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for the year in which the
reappraisal was performed. 

(III)  In any case in which a reappraisal is ordered, state equalization payments to school districts
within the county during the year in which the reappraisal is performed shall be based upon the
valuation for assessment as reflected in the county's abstract for assessment. The state board of
equalization shall also order the board of county commissioners of the county to impose, and the
board of county commissioners shall impose, at the time of imposition of property taxes during
such year an additional property tax on all taxable property within the county in an amount
sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess
payments made by the state to school districts within the county during the year in which such
reappraisal was performed plus interest thereon at a rate and for such time as are prescribed by
law. 

(IV)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study
and if the state board of equalization fails to order a reappraisal, state equalization payments to
school districts within the county during the year following the year in which the study was
conducted shall be based upon the valuation for assessment for the county as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment. The board of county commissioners of such county shall impose
in the year in which such school payments are made an additional property tax on all taxable
property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners
shall repay, the state for the difference between the amount the state actually paid in state
equalization payments during such year and what the state would have paid during such year had
such state payments been based on the valuation for assessment as determined by the study.

[As amended November 6, 1956.; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 30, 1982.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon
proclamation of the Governor, January 1, 1989.]
*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 236 004.0 021.0 0 CO 1876 1989 ***

Section 4.  Limitation   municipal corporations may adopt, when. No recall petition shall be
circulated or filed against any officer until he has actually held his office for at least six months,
save and except it may be filed against any member of the state legislature at any time after five
days from the convening and organizing of the legislature after his election. 

After one recall petition and election, no further petition shall be filed against the same officer
during the term for which he was elected, unless the petitioners signing said petition shall equal
fifty percent of the votes cast at the last preceding general election for all of the candidates for the
office held by such officer as herein above defined. 

In any recall election of a state elective officer, if the incumbent whose recall is sought is not
recalled, he shall be repaid from the state treasury for the expenses of such election in the manner
provided by law. The general assembly may establish procedures for the reimbursement by a
local
governmental entity of expenses incurred by an incumbent elective officer of such governmental
entity whose recall is sought but who is not recalled. 

If the governor is sought to be recalled under the provisions of this article, the duties herein
imposed upon him shall be performed by the lieutenant governor; and if the secretary of state is
sought to be recalled, the duties herein imposed upon him, shall be performed by the state
auditor. 

The recall may also be exercised by the registered electors of each county, city and county, city
and town of the state, with reference to the elective officers thereof, under such procedure as
shall
be provided by law. 

Until otherwise provided by law, the legislative body of any such county, city and county, city
and
town may provide for the manner of exercising such recall powers in such counties, cities and
counties, cities and towns, but shall not require any such recall to be signed by registered electors
more in number than twenty five percent of the entire vote cast at the last preceding election, as
in
section 1 hereof more particularly set forth, for all the candidates for office which the incumbent
sought to be recalled occupies, as herein above defined. 

Every person having authority to exercise or exercising any public or governmental duty, power
or
function, shall be an elective officer, or one appointed, drawn or designated in accordance with
law by an elective officer or officers, or by some board, commission, person or persons legally
appointed by an elective officer or officers, each of which said elective officers shall be subject to
the recall provision of this constitution; provided, that, subject to regulation by law, any person
may, without compensation therefor, file petitions, or complaints in courts concerning crimes, or
do police duty only in cases of immediate danger to person or property. 

Nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting or limiting the present or future powers
of cities and counties or cities having charters adopted under the authority given by the
constitution, except as in the last three preceding paragraphs expressed. 

In the submission to the electors of any petition proposed under this article, all officers shall be
guided by the general laws of the state, except as otherwise herein provided. 

This article is self executing, but legislation may be enacted to facilitate its operations, but in no
way limiting or restricting the provisions of this article, or the powers herein reserved.

[Added November 5, 1912.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, January 3, 1989.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 237 003.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1990 ***

Section 3.  Educational qualifications of elector.

(Deleted by amendment.)

[As amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1991.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 238 008.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1990 ***

Section 8.  Publication of laws. The general assembly shall provide for the publication of the
laws
passed at each session thereof.


[As amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1991.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 239 018.0 004.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***
                    
Section 18. State seal. There shall be a seal of the state, which shall be kept by the secretary of
state, shall be called the "Great Seal of the State of Colorado", and shall be in the form prescribed
by the general assembly. 

[As amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1991.
(For the text of this amendment and the votes cast thereon, see L. 90, p. 1861, and L. 91, p.
2032.)] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 240 003.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 3. Terms of senators and representatives. (1) Senators shall be elected for the term of
four
years and representatives for the term of two years. 

(2) In order to broaden the opportunities for public service and to assure that the general
assembly
is representative of Colorado citizens, no senator shall serve more than two consecutive terms in
the senate, and no representative shall serve more than four consecutive terms in the house of
representatives. This limitation on the number of terms shall apply to terms of office beginning
on
or after January 1, 1991. Any person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy in the general
assembly
and who serves at least one half of a term of office shall be considered to have served a term in
that office for purposes of this subsection (2). Terms are considered consecutive unless they are
at
least four years apart. 

As amended November 5, 1974   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, December 20,
1974.; as amended by the People November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 3, 1991.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 241 010.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 10.  1976 Winter Olympics.

(Deleted by amendment.)

[Adopted November 7, 1972    Effective upon proclamation by the Governor, January 11, 1973;
as amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1991.
]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 242 012.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 12.  Duel   disqualifies for office.

(Deleted by amendment.)

[As amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1991.
]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 243 015.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 15. Veterans' preference. (1) (a) The passing grade on each competitive examination
shall
be the same for each candidate for appointment or employment in the personnel system of the
state or in any comparable civil service or merit system of any agency or political subdivision of
the state, including any municipality chartered or to be chartered under article XX of this
constitution. 

(b) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of each candidate on each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is separated under honorable conditions and who,
other
than for training purposes, (i) served in any branch of the armed forces of the United States
during
any period of any declared war or any undeclared war or other armed hostilities against an armed
foreign enemy, or (ii) served on active duty in any such branch in any campaign or expedition for
which a campaign badge is authorized. 

(c) Ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who has so served, other than for training purposes, and
who, because of disability incurred in the line of duty, is receiving monetary compensation or
disability retired benefits by reason of public laws administered by the department of defense or
the veterans administration, or any successor thereto. 

(d) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is the unremarried widow of any person who was or
would have been entitled to additional points under paragraph (b) or (c) of this subsection (1) or
of any person who died during such service or as a result of service connected cause while on
active duty in any such branch, other than for training purposes. 

(e) No more than a total of ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any such candidate
pursuant to this subsection (1). 

(2) The certificate of the department of defense or of the veterans administration, or any
successor
thereto, shall be conclusive proof of service under honorable conditions or of disability or death
incurred in the line of duty during such service. 

(3) (a) When a reduction in the work force of the state or any such political subdivision thereof
becomes necessary because of lack of work or curtailment of funds, employees not eligible for
added points under subsection (1) of this section shall be separated before those so entitled who
have the same or more service in the employment of the state or such political subdivision,
counting both military service for which such points are added and such employment with the
state or such political subdivision, as the case may be, from which the employee is to be
separated. 

(b) In the case of such a person eligible for added points who has completed twenty or more years
of active military service, no military service shall be counted in determining length of service in
respect to such retention rights. In the case of such a person who has completed less than twenty
years of such military service, no more than ten years of service under subsection (1) (b) (i) and
(ii) shall be counted in determining such length of service for such retention rights. 

(4) The state personnel board and each comparable supervisory or administrative board of any
such civil service or merit system of any agency of the state or any such political subdivision
thereof, shall implement the provisions of this section to assure that all persons entitled to added
points and preference in examinations and retention shall enjoy their full privileges and rights
granted by this section. 

(5) Any examination which is a promotional examination, but which is also open to persons
other
than employees for whom such appointment would be a promotion, shall be considered a
promotional examination for the purposes of this section. 

(6) Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall be
entitled
to the addition of points under this section for more than one appointment or employment with
the
same jurisdiction, personnel system, civil service, or merit system. 

(7) This section shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 1971, and shall grant
veterans'
preference to all persons who have served in the armed forces of the United States in any
declared
or undeclared war, conflict, engagement, expedition, or campaign for which a campaign badge
has
been authorized, and who meet the requirements of service or disability, or both, as provided in
this section. This section shall apply to all public employment examinations, except promotional
examinations, conducted on or after such date, and it shall be in all respects self executing.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective July 1, 1971; (7) amended November 6, 1990   
Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1991. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 244 002.0 013.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 2.  Who liable to impeachment   judgment   no bar to prosecution. The governor and
other
state and judicial officers, shall be liable to impeachment for high crimes or misdemeanors or
malfeasance in office, but judgment in such cases shall only extend to removal from office and
disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit in the state. The party, whether
convicted or acquitted, shall, nevertheless, be liable to prosecution, trial, judgment and
punishment according to law.


[As amended November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3,
1991.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 245 009.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 9. Limited gaming permitted. (1) Any provisions of section 2 of this article XVIII or any
other provisions of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, limited gaming in the City
of
Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek shall be lawful as of October 1,
1991. 

(2) The administration and regulation of this section 9 shall be under an appointed limited
gaming
control commission, referred to in this section 9 as the commission; said commission to be
created
under such official or department of government of the state of Colorado as the general assembly
shall provide by May 1, 1991. Such official or the director of the department of government shall
appoint the commission by July 1, 1991. The commission shall promulgate all necessary rules
and
regulations relating to the licensing of limited gaming by October 1, 1991, in the manner
authorized by statute for the promulgation of administrative rules and regulations. Such rules and
regulations shall include the necessary defining of terms that are not otherwise defined. 

(3) Limited gaming shall be subject to the following: 

(a) Limited gaming shall take place only in the existing Colorado cities of: the City of Central,
county of Gilpin, the City of Black Hawk, county of Gilpin, and the City of Cripple Creek,
county
of Teller. Such limited gaming shall be further confined to the commercial districts of said cities
as said districts are respectively defined in the city ordinances adopted by: the City of Central on
October 7, 1981, the City of Black Hawk on May 4, 1978, and the City of Cripple Creek on
December 3, 1973. 

(b) Limited gaming shall only be conducted in structures which conform, as determined by the
respective municipal governing bodies, to the architectural styles and designs that were common
to the areas prior to World War I and which conform to the requirements of applicable respective
city ordinances, regardless of the age of said structures. 

(c) No more than thirty five percent of the square footage of any building and no more than fifty
percent of any one floor of such building, may be used for limited gaming. 

(d) Limited gaming operations shall be prohibited between the hours of 2:00 o'clock a.m. and
8:00
o'clock a.m. 

(e) Limited gaming may occur in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 

(4) As certain terms are used in regards to limited gaming: 

(a) "Adjusted gross proceeds" means the total amount of all wagers made by players on limited
gaming less all payments to players; said payments to players being deemed to include all
payments of cash premiums, merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits, or any other thing of
value. 

(b) "Limited gaming" means the use of slot machines and the card games of blackjack and poker,
each game having a maximum single bet of five dollars. 

(c) "Slot machine" means any mechanical, electrical, video, electronic, or other device,
contrivance, or machine which, after insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, or upon
payment
of any required consideration whatsoever by a player, is available to be played or operated, and
which, whether by reason of the skill of the player or application of the element of chance, or
both, may deliver or entitle the player operating the machine to receive cash premiums,
merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits, or any other thing of value other than
unredeemable free games, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machines or in any
other manner. 

(5) (a) Up to a maximum of forty percent of the adjusted gross proceeds of limited gaming shall
be paid by each licensee, in addition to any applicable license fees, for the privilege of
conducting
limited gaming. Such percentage shall be established annually by the commission according to
the
criteria established by the general assembly in the implementing legislation to be enacted
pursuant
to paragraph (c) of this subsection (5). Such payments shall be made into a limited gaming fund
that is hereby created in the state treasury. 

(b) (I) From the moneys in the limited gaming fund, the state treasurer is hereby authorized to
pay
all ongoing expenses of the commission and any other state agency, related to the administration
of this section 9. Such payment shall be made upon proper presentation of a voucher prepared by
the commission in accordance with statutes governing payments of liabilities incurred on behalf
of
the state. Such payment shall not be conditioned on any appropriation by the general assembly. 

(II) At the end of each state fiscal year, the state treasurer shall distribute the balance remaining
in
the limited gaming fund, except for an amount equal to all expenses of the administration of this
section 9 for the preceding two month period, according to the following guidelines: fifty percent
shall be transferred to the state general fund or such other fund as the general assembly shall
provide; twenty eight percent shall be transferred to the state historical fund, which fund is
hereby
created in the state treasury; twelve percent shall be distributed to the governing bodies of Gilpin
county and Teller county in proportion to the gaming revenues generated in each county; the
remaining ten percent shall be distributed to the governing bodies of the cities of: the City of
Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek in proportion to the gaming
revenues generated in each respective city. 

(III) Of the moneys in the state historical fund, from which the state treasurer shall also make
annual distributions, twenty percent shall be used for the preservation and restoration of the cities
of: the City of Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek, and such moneys
shall be distributed, to the governing bodies of the respective cities, according to the proportion
of
the gaming revenues generated in each respective city. The remaining eighty percent in the state
historical fund shall be used for the historic preservation and restoration of historical sites and
municipalities throughout the state in a manner to be determined by the general assembly. 

(c) The general assembly shall enact, amend, or repeal such laws as are necessary to implement
the provisions of this section 9, by May 1, 1991. 

(d) The general assembly shall make a general fund appropriation to the limited gaming fund, in
the form of a loan, to provide the state treasurer sufficient funds to cover any and all
organizational and administrative expenses in connection with this section 9, to be effective no
later than July 1, 1991. This loan shall be repaid to the general fund by and at the discretion of
the
state treasurer at the end of any fiscal year, out of the adjusted gross proceeds paid into the
limited
gaming fund, not sooner than July 1, 1992 and such repayment may be extended to not later than
July 1, 1997. Any repayment shall be made before the state treasurer makes any distributions
under subparagraph (II) of paragraph (b) of this subsection (5). 

(e) The general assembly shall enact provisions for the special licensing of qualifying nonprofit
charitable organizations desiring to periodically host charitable gaming activities in licensed
gaming establishments. 

(f) If any provision of this section 9 is held invalid, the remainder of this section 9 shall remain
unimpaired. 

[Enacted by the People November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1991.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 246 009.A 018.0 0 CO 1876 1991 ***

Section 9a. U.S. senators and representatives   limitations on terms. (1) In order to broaden the
opportunities for public service and to assure that members of the United States Congress from
Colorado are representative of and responsive to Colorado citizens, no United States Senator
from
Colorado shall serve more than two consecutive terms in the United States Senate, and no United
States Representative from Colorado shall serve more than three consecutive terms in the United
States House of Representatives. This limitation on the number of terms shall apply to terms of
office beginning on or after January 1, 1991. Any person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy in
the United States Congress and who serves at least one half of a term of office shall be
considered
to have served a term in that office for purposes of this subsection (1). Terms are considered
consecutive unless they are at least four years apart. 

(2) The people of Colorado hereby state their support for a nationwide limit of twelve
consecutive
years of service in the United States Senate and House of Representatives and instruct their
public
officials to use their best efforts to work for such a limit. 

(3) The people of Colorado declare that the provisions of this section shall be deemed severable
from the remainder of this measure and that their intention is that federal officials elected from
Colorado will continue voluntarily to observe the wishes of the people as stated in this section in
the event any provision thereof is held invalid.

[Adopted by the People November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1991.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 247 030.B 002.0 0 CO 1876 1992 ***

Section 30b. No Protected Status Based on Homosexual, Lesbian or Bisexual Orientation.
Neither
the State of Colorado, through any of its branches or departments, nor any of its agencies,
political
subdivisions, municipalities or school districts, shall enact, adopt or enforce any statute,
regulation, ordinance or policy whereby homosexual, lesbian or bisexual orientation, conduct,
practices or relationships shall constitute or otherwise be the basis of or entitle any person or
class
of persons to have or claim any minority status, quota preferences, protected status or claim of
discrimination. This Section of the Constitution shall be in all respects self executing. 

[Enacted by the people November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor.
Declared to violate the United States Constitution by the United States Supreme Court in 1996.
Not in force.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 248 016.A 002.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 16a. Rights of crime victims. Any person who is a victim of a criminal act, or such
person's designee, legal guardian, or surviving immediate family members if such person is
deceased, shall have the right to be heard when relevant, informed, and present at all critical
stages of the criminal justice process. All terminology, including the term "critical stages", shall
be defined by the general assembly. 

[As enacted November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 249 007.0 007.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 7. General election. The general election shall be held on such day as may be prescribed
by law.

[As amended November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 250 001.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 1. Supervision of schools   board of education. (1) The general supervision of the public
schools of the state shall be vested in a board of education whose powers and duties shall be as
now or hereafter prescribed by law. Said board shall consist of a member from each
congressional
district of the state and, if the total number of such congressional districts is an even number, one
additional member, and said members shall be elected as hereinafter provided. The members of
said board shall be elected by the registered electors of the state, voting at general elections, in
such manner and for such terms as may be by law prescribed; provided, that provisions may be
made by law for election of a member from each congressional district of the state by the electors
of such district; and provided, further, that each member from a congressional district of the state
shall be a qualified elector of such district. If the total number of congressional districts of the
state is an even number, the additional member of said board shall be elected from the state at
large. The members of said board shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed
for any necessary expenses incurred by them in performing their duties as members of said board. 

(2) The commissioner of education shall be appointed by the board of education and shall not be
included in the classified civil service of the state. 

(3) The qualifications, tenure, compensation, powers, and duties of said commissioner shall be as
prescribed by law, subject to the supervision of said board. 


[As amended November 2, 1948.; as amended November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, January 14, 1993.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 251 009.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 9. State board of land commissioners. (1) The state board of land commissioners shall be
composed of three persons to be appointed by the governor, with the consent of the senate, who
shall have the direction, control, and disposition of the public lands of the state under such
regulations as are and may be prescribed by law, one of which persons shall at the time of his
appointment be designated as president of the board and one of which persons shall at the time of
his appointment be designated as the register of the board.  The third member of said board shall
at the time of his appointment be designated as the engineer of the board and shall always be
professionally a civil engineer, who, for at least five years, has been actively engaged in the
practice of civil engineering.  The successor and successors of the first members of the board
shall
each be appointed for terms of six years.

(2) The members of the board shall each receive a salary of three thousand dollars per annum
until
otherwise provided by law; but the salary of each member of the board is to be paid out of the
income of the state board of land commissioners.

[As Amended January 14, 1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 252 020.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 20. The Taxpayer's Bill of Rights. 
(1) General provisions. This section takes effect December 31, 1992 or as stated. Its preferred
interpretation shall reasonably restrain most the growth of government. All provisions are
self-executing and severable and supersede conflicting state constitutional, state statutory,
charter,
or other state or local provisions. Other limits on district revenue, spending, and debt may be
weakened only by future voter approval. Individual or class action enforcement suits may be filed
and shall have the highest civil priority of resolution. Successful plaintiffs are allowed costs and
reasonable attorney fees, but a district is not unless a suit against it be ruled frivolous. Revenue
collected, kept, or spent illegally since four full fiscal years before a suit is filed shall be refunded
with 10% annual simple interest from the initial conduct. Subject to judicial review, districts may
use any reasonable method for refunds under this section, including temporary tax credits or rate
reductions. Refunds need not be proportional when prior payments are impractical to identify or
return. When annual district revenue is less than annual payments on general obligation bonds,
pensions, and final court judgments, (4) (a) and (7) shall be suspended to provide for the
deficiency.

(2) Term definitions. Within this section: (a) "Ballot issue" means a non-recall petition or
referred
measure in an election.

(b) "District" means the state or any local government, excluding enterprises.

(c) "Emergency" excludes economic conditions, revenue shortfalls, or district salary or fringe
benefit increases.

(d) "Enterprise" means a government-owned business authorized to issue its own revenue bonds
and receiving under 10% of annual revenue in grants from all Colorado state and local
governments combined.

(e) "Fiscal year spending" means all district expenditures and reserve increases except, as to both,
those for refunds made in the current or next fiscal year or those from gifts, federal funds,
collections for another government, pension contributions by employees and pension fund
earnings, reserve transfers or expenditures, damage awards, or property sales.

(f) "Inflation" means the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index.

(g) "Local growth" for a non-school district means a net percentage change in actual value of all
real property in a district from construction of taxable real property improvements, minus
destruction of similar improvements, and additions to, minus deletions from, taxable real
property. For a school district, it means the percentage change in its student enrollment.

(3) Election provisions.

(a) Ballot issues shall be decided in a state general election, biennial local district election, or on
the first Tuesday in November of odd-numbered years. Except for petitions, bonded debt, or
charter or constitutional provisions, districts may consolidate ballot issues and voters may
approve
a delay of up to four years in voting on ballot issues. District actions taken during such a delay
shall not extend beyond that period.

(b) 15-25 days before a ballot issue election, districts shall mail at the least cost, and as a package
where districts with ballot issues overlap, a titled notice or set of notices addressed to "All
Registered Voters" at each address of one or more active registered electors.  Titles shall have
this
order of preference: "NOTICE OF ELECTION TO INCREASE TAXES/TO INCREASE
DEBT/ON A CITIZEN PETITION/ON A REFERRED MEASURE." Except for district
voter-approved additions, notices shall include only:

(i) The election date, hours, ballot title, text, and local election office address and telephone
number.

(ii) For proposed district tax or bonded debt increases, the estimated or actual total of district
fiscal year spending for the current year and each of the past four years, and the overall
percentage
and dollar change.

(iii) For the first full fiscal year of each proposed district tax increase, district estimates of the
maximum dollar amount of each increase and of district fiscal year spending without the
increase.

(iv) For proposed district bonded debt, its principal amount and maximum annual and total
district
repayment cost, and the principal balance of total current district bonded debt and its maximum
annual and remaining total district repayment cost.

(v) Two summaries, up to 500 words each, one for and one against the proposal, of written
comments filed with the election officer by 30 days before the election. No summary shall
mention names of persons or private groups, nor any endorsements of or resolutions against the
proposal. Petition representatives following these rules shall write this summary for their
petition.
The election officer shall maintain and accurately summarize all other relevant written
comments.

(c) Except by later voter approval, if a tax increase or fiscal year spending exceeds any estimate
in
(b) (iii) for the same fiscal year, the tax increase is thereafter reduced up to 100% in proportion to
the combined dollar excess, and the combined excess revenue refunded in the next fiscal year.
District bonded debt shall not issue on terms that could exceed its share of its maximum
repayment costs in (b) (iv). Ballot titles for tax or bonded debt increases shall begin, "SHALL
(DISTRICT) TAXES BE INCREASED (first, or if phased in, final, full fiscal year dollar
increase)
ANNUALLY...?" or "SHALL (DISTRICT) DEBT BE INCREASED (principal amount), WITH
A
REPAYMENT COST OF (maximum total district cost), ...?"

(4) Required elections. Starting November 4, 1992, districts must have voter approval in advance
for:

(a) Unless (1) or (6) applies, any new tax, tax rate increase, mill levy above that for the prior
year,
valuation for assessment ratio increase for a property class, or extension of an expiring tax, or a
tax policy change directly causing a net tax revenue gain to any district.

(b) Except for refinancing district bonded debt at a lower interest rate or adding new employees
to
existing district pension plans, creation of any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect district debt
or
other financial obligation whatsoever without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably
and held for payments in all future fiscal years.

(5) Emergency reserves. To use for declared emergencies only, each district shall reserve for
1993
1% or more, for 1994 2% or more, and for all later years 3% or more of its fiscal year spending
excluding bonded debt service. Unused reserves apply to the next year's reserve.

(6) Emergency taxes. This subsection grants no new taxing power. Emergency property taxes are
prohibited. Emergency tax revenue is excluded for purposes of (3) (c) and (7), even if later
ratified
by voters. Emergency taxes shall also meet all of the following conditions: (a) A 2/3 majority of
the members of each house of the general assembly or of a local district board declares the
emergency and imposes the tax by separate recorded roll call votes.

(b) Emergency tax revenue shall be spent only after emergency reserves are depleted, and shall be
refunded within 180 days after the emergency ends if not spent on the emergency.

(c) A tax not approved on the next election date 60 days or more after the declaration shall end
with that election month.

(7) Spending limits. (a) The maximum annual percentage change in state fiscal year spending
equals inflation plus the percentage change in state population in the prior calendar year, adjusted
for revenue changes approved by voters after 1991. Population shall be determined by annual
federal census estimates and such number shall be adjusted every decade to match the federal
census.

(b) The maximum annual percentage change in each local district's fiscal year spending equals
inflation in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(c) The maximum annual percentage change in each district's property tax revenue equals
inflation
in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for property tax revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(d) If revenue from sources not excluded from fiscal year spending exceeds these limits in dollars
for that fiscal year, the excess shall be refunded in the next fiscal year unless voters approve a
revenue change as an offset. Initial district bases are current fiscal year spending and 1991
property tax collected in 1992. Qualification or disqualification as an enterprise shall change
district bases and future year limits. Future creation of district bonded debt shall increase, and
retiring or refinancing district bonded debt shall lower, fiscal year spending and property tax
revenue by the annual debt service so funded. Debt service changes, reductions, (1) and (3) (c)
refunds, and voter-approved revenue changes are dollar amounts that are exceptions to, and not
part of, any district base. Voter-approved revenue changes do not require a tax rate change.

(8) Revenue limits. (a) New or increased transfer tax rates on real property are prohibited. No
new
state real property tax or local district income tax shall be imposed. Neither an income tax rate
increase nor a new state definition of taxable income shall apply before the next tax year. Any
income tax law change after July 1, 1992 shall also require all taxable net income to be taxed at
one rate, excluding refund tax credits or voter-approved tax credits, with no added tax or
surcharge.

(b) Each district may enact cumulative uniform exemptions and credits to reduce or end business
personal property taxes.

(c) Regardless of reassessment frequency, valuation notices shall be mailed annually and may be
appealed annually, with no presumption in favor of any pending valuation. Past or future sales by
a lender or government shall also be considered as comparable market sales and their sales prices
kept as public records. Actual value shall be stated on all property tax bills and valuation notices
and, for residential real property, determined solely by the market approach to appraisal.

(9) State mandates. Except for public education through grade 12 or as required of a local district
by federal law, a local district may reduce or end its subsidy to any program delegated to it by the
general assembly for administration. For current programs, the state may require 90 days notice
and that the adjustment occur in a maximum of three equal annual installments.

[Enacted by the People November 3, 1992 -- Section 1 of article V of this constitution provides
that initiated measures shall take effect upon the Governor's proclamation. Subsection (1) of this
section provides that this section shall take effect December 31, 1992, or as stated. (See
subsection (4).) The Governor's proclamation was signed January 14, 1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 253 003.0 011.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 3. Public debt of state   limitations. The state shall not contract any debt by loan in any
form, except to provide for casual deficiencies of revenue, erect public buildings for the use of
the
state, suppress insurrection, defend the state, or, in time of war, assist in defending the United
States; and the amount of debt contracted in any one year to provide for deficiencies of revenue
shall not exceed one fourth of a mill on each dollar of valuation of taxable property within the
state, and the aggregate amount of such debt shall not at any time exceed three fourths of a mill
on
each dollar of said valuation, until the valuation shall equal one hundred millions of dollars, and
thereafter such debt shall not exceed one hundred thousand dollars; and the debt incurred in any
one year for erection of public buildings shall not exceed one half mill on each dollar of said
valuation; and the aggregate amount of such debt shall never at any time exceed the sum of fifty
thousand dollars (except as provided in section 5 of this article), and in all cases the valuation in
this section mentioned shall be that of the assessment last preceding the creation of said debt.

[As amended November 7, 1922.; as amended November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, January 14, 1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 254 015.0 012.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 15. Veterans' preference. (1) (a) The passing grade on each competitive examination
shall
be the same for each candidate for appointment or employment in the personnel system of the
state or in any comparable civil service or merit system of any agency or political subdivision of
the state, including any municipality chartered or to be chartered under article XX of this
constitution. 

(b) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of each candidate on each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is separated under honorable conditions and who,
other
than for training purposes, (i) served in any branch of the armed forces of the United States
during
any period of any declared war or any undeclared war or other armed hostilities against an armed
foreign enemy, or (ii) served on active duty in any such branch in any campaign or expedition for
which a campaign badge is authorized. 

(c) Ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who has so served, other than for training purposes, and
who, because of disability incurred in the line of duty, is receiving monetary compensation or
disability retired benefits by reason of public laws administered by the department of defense or
the veterans administration, or any successor thereto. 

(d) Five points shall be added to the passing grade of any candidate of each such examination,
except any promotional examination, who is the surviving spouse of any person who was or
would have been entitled to additional points under paragraph (b) or (c) of this subsection (1) or
of any person who died during such service or as a result of service connected cause while on
active duty in any such branch, other than for training purposes. 

(e) No more than a total of ten points shall be added to the passing grade of any such candidate
pursuant to this subsection (1). 

(2) The certificate of the department of defense or of the veterans administration, or any
successor
thereto, shall be conclusive proof of service under honorable conditions or of disability or death
incurred in the line of duty during such service. 

(3) (a) When a reduction in the work force of the state or any such political subdivision thereof
becomes necessary because of lack of work or curtailment of funds, employees not eligible for
added points under subsection (1) of this section shall be separated before those so entitled who
have the same or more service in the employment of the state or such political subdivision,
counting both military service for which such points are added and such employment with the
state or such political subdivision, as the case may be, from which the employee is to be
separated. 

(b) In the case of such a person eligible for added points who has completed twenty or more years
of active military service, no military service shall be counted in determining length of service in
respect to such retention rights. In the case of such a person who has completed less than twenty
years of such military service, no more than ten years of service under subsection (1) (b) (i) and
(ii) shall be counted in determining such length of service for such retention rights. 

(4) The state personnel board and each comparable supervisory or administrative board of any
such civil service or merit system of any agency of the state or any such political subdivision
thereof, shall implement the provisions of this section to assure that all persons entitled to added
points and preference in examinations and retention shall enjoy their full privileges and rights
granted by this section. 

(5) Any examination which is a promotional examination, but which is also open to persons
other
than employees for whom such appointment would be a promotion, shall be considered a
promotional examination for the purposes of this section. 

(6) Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, no person shall be
entitled
to the addition of points under this section for more than one appointment or employment with
the
same jurisdiction, personnel system, civil service, or merit system. 

(7) This section shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 1971, and shall grant
veterans'
preference to all persons who have served in the armed forces of the United States in any
declared
or undeclared war, conflict, engagement, expedition, or campaign for which a campaign badge
has
been authorized, and who meet the requirements of service or disability, or both, as provided in
this section. This section shall apply to all public employment examinations, except promotional
examinations, conducted on or after such date, and it shall be in all respects self executing.

[Adopted November 3, 1970    Effective July 1, 1971; (7) amended November 6, 1990   
Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 3, 1991; as amended November 3, 1992   
Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 14, 1993. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 255 009.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

Section 9. Limited gaming permitted. (1) Any provisions of section 2 of this article XVIII or any
other provisions of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, limited gaming in the City
of
Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek shall be lawful as of October 1,
1991. 

(2) The administration and regulation of this section 9 shall be under an appointed limited
gaming
control commission, referred to in this section 9 as the commission; said commission to be
created
under such official or department of government of the state of Colorado as the general assembly
shall provide by May 1, 1991. Such official or the director of the department of government shall
appoint the commission by July 1, 1991. The commission shall promulgate all necessary rules
and
regulations relating to the licensing of limited gaming by October 1, 1991, in the manner
authorized by statute for the promulgation of administrative rules and regulations. Such rules and
regulations shall include the necessary defining of terms that are not otherwise defined. 

(3) Limited gaming shall be subject to the following: 

(a) Limited gaming shall take place only in the existing Colorado cities of: the City of Central,
county of Gilpin, the City of Black Hawk, county of Gilpin, and the City of Cripple Creek,
county
of Teller. Such limited gaming shall be further confined to the commercial districts of said cities
as said districts are respectively defined in the city ordinances adopted by: the City of Central on
October 7, 1981, the City of Black Hawk on May 4, 1978, and the City of Cripple Creek on
December 3, 1973. 

(b) Limited gaming shall only be conducted in structures which conform, as determined by the
respective municipal governing bodies, to the architectural styles and designs that were common
to the areas prior to World War I and which conform to the requirements of applicable respective
city ordinances, regardless of the age of said structures. 

(c) No more than thirty five percent of the square footage of any building and no more than fifty
percent of any one floor of such building, may be used for limited gaming. 

(d) Limited gaming operations shall be prohibited between the hours of 2:00 o'clock a.m. and
8:00
o'clock a.m. 

(e) Limited gaming may occur in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 

(4) As certain terms are used in regards to limited gaming: 

(a) "Adjusted gross proceeds" means the total amount of all wagers made by players on limited
gaming less all payments to players; said payments to players being deemed to include all
payments of cash premiums, merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits, or any other thing of
value. 

(b) "Limited gaming" means the use of slot machines and the card games of blackjack and poker,
each game having a maximum single bet of five dollars. 

(c) "Slot machine" means any mechanical, electrical, video, electronic, or other device,
contrivance, or machine which, after insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, or upon
payment
of any required consideration whatsoever by a player, is available to be played or operated, and
which, whether by reason of the skill of the player or application of the element of chance, or
both, may deliver or entitle the player operating the machine to receive cash premiums,
merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits, or any other thing of value other than
unredeemable free games, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machines or in any
other manner. 

(5) (a) Up to a maximum of forty percent of the adjusted gross proceeds of limited gaming shall
be paid by each licensee, in addition to any applicable license fees, for the privilege of
conducting
limited gaming. Such percentage shall be established annually by the commission according to
the
criteria established by the general assembly in the implementing legislation to be enacted
pursuant
to paragraph (c) of this subsection (5). Such payments shall be made into a limited gaming fund
that is hereby created in the state treasury. 

(b) (I) From the moneys in the limited gaming fund, the state treasurer is hereby authorized to
pay
all ongoing expenses of the commission and any other state agency, related to the administration
of this section 9. Such payment shall be made upon proper presentation of a voucher prepared by
the commission in accordance with statutes governing payments of liabilities incurred on behalf
of
the state. Such payment shall not be conditioned on any appropriation by the general assembly. 

(II) At the end of each state fiscal year, the state treasurer shall distribute the balance remaining
in
the limited gaming fund, except for an amount equal to all expenses of the administration of this
section 9 for the preceding two month period, according to the following guidelines: fifty percent
shall be transferred to the state general fund or such other fund as the general assembly shall
provide; twenty eight percent shall be transferred to the state historical fund, which fund is
hereby
created in the state treasury; twelve percent shall be distributed to the governing bodies of Gilpin
county and Teller county in proportion to the gaming revenues generated in each county; the
remaining ten percent shall be distributed to the governing bodies of the cities of: the City of
Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek in proportion to the gaming
revenues generated in each respective city. 

(III) Of the moneys in the state historical fund, from which the state treasurer shall also make
annual distributions, twenty percent shall be used for the preservation and restoration of the cities
of: the City of Central, the City of Black Hawk, and the City of Cripple Creek, and such moneys
shall be distributed, to the governing bodies of the respective cities, according to the proportion
of
the gaming revenues generated in each respective city. The remaining eighty percent in the state
historical fund shall be used for the historic preservation and restoration of historical sites and
municipalities throughout the state in a manner to be determined by the general assembly. 

(c) The general assembly shall enact, amend, or repeal such laws as are necessary to implement
the provisions of this section 9, by May 1, 1991. 

(d) The general assembly shall make a general fund appropriation to the limited gaming fund, in
the form of a loan, to provide the state treasurer sufficient funds to cover any and all
organizational and administrative expenses in connection with this section 9, to be effective no
later than July 1, 1991. This loan shall be repaid to the general fund by and at the discretion of
the
state treasurer at the end of any fiscal year, out of the adjusted gross proceeds paid into the
limited
gaming fund, not sooner than July 1, 1992 and such repayment may be extended to not later than
July 1, 1997. Any repayment shall be made before the state treasurer makes any distributions
under subparagraph (II) of paragraph (b) of this subsection (5). 

(e) The general assembly shall enact provisions for the special licensing of qualifying nonprofit
charitable organizations desiring to periodically host charitable gaming activities in licensed
gaming establishments. 

(f) If any provision of this section 9 is held invalid, the remainder of this section 9 shall remain
unimpaired. 

(6) Local vote on legality of limited gaming   election required. (a) Except as provided in
paragraph (e) of this subsection (6), limited gaming shall not be lawful within any city, town, or
unincorporated portion of a county which has been granted constitutional authority for limited
gaming within its boundaries unless first approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
electors of such city, town, or county voting thereon. The question shall first be submitted to the
electors at a general, regular, or special election held within thirteen months after the effective
date of the amendment which first adds such city, county, or town to those authorized for limited
gaming pursuant to this constitution; and said election shall be conducted pursuant to applicable
state or local government election laws. 

(b) If approval of limited gaming is not obtained when the question is first submitted to the
electors, the question may be submitted at subsequent elections held in accordance with
paragraph
(d) of this subsection (6); except that, once approval is obtained, limited gaming shall thereafter
be lawful within the said city, town, or unincorporated portion of a county so long as the city,
town, or county remains among those with constitutional authority for limited gaming within
their
boundaries. 

(c) Nothing contained in this subsection (6) shall be construed to limit the ability of a city, town,
or county to regulate the conduct of limited gaming as otherwise authorized by statute or by this
constitution. 

(d) (I) The question submitted to the electors at any election held pursuant to this subsection (6)
shall be phrased in substantially the following form: "Shall limited gaming be lawful within ?" 

(II) The failure to acquire approval of limited gaming in the unincorporated portion of a county
shall not prevent lawful limited gaming within a city or town located in such county where such
approval is acquired in a city or town election, and failure to acquire such approval in a city or
town election shall not prevent lawful limited gaming within the unincorporated area of the
county in which such city or town is located where such approval is acquired in an election in the
unincorporated area of a county. 

(III) If approval of limited gaming is not acquired when the question is first submitted in
accordance with this subsection (6), the question may be submitted at subsequent elections so
long as at least four years have elapsed since any previous election at which the question was
submitted. 

(e) Nothing contained in this subsection (6) shall be construed to affect the authority granted
upon
the initial adoption of this section at the 1990 general election, or the conduct and regulation of
gaming on Indian reservations pursuant to federal law. 

(f) For purposes of this subsection (6), a "city, town, or county" includes all land and buildings
located within, or owned and controlled by, such city, town, or county or any political
subdivision
thereof. "City, town, or county" also includes the city and county of Denver. 

[Enacted by the People November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1991.; (6) enacted November 3, 1992    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 14, 1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 302 000.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 1. Great Outdoors Colorado Program

(1) The people of the State of Colorado intend that the net proceeds of every state-supervised
lottery game operated under the authority of Article XVIII, Section 2 shall be guaranteed and
permanently dedicated to the preservation, protection, enhancement and management of the
state's
wildlife, park, river, trail and open space heritage, except as specifically provided in this article.
Accordingly, there shall be established the Great Outdoors Colorado Program to preserve,
protect,
enhance and manage the state's wildlife, park, river, trail and open space heritage. The Great
Outdoors Colorado Program shall include:
(a) Wildlife program grants which:
(I) Develop wildlife watching opportunities;
(II) Implement educational programs about wildlife and wildlife environment;
(III) Provide appropriate programs for maintaining Colorado's diverse wildlife heritage;
(IV) Protect crucial wildlife habitats through the acquisition of lands, leases or easements and
restore critical areas;
(b) Outdoor recreation program grants which:
(I) Establish and improve state parks and recreation areas throughout the State of Colorado;
(II) Develop appropriate public information and environmental education resources on
Colorado's
natural resources at state parks, recreation areas, and other locations throughout the state;
(III) Acquire, construct and maintain trails and river greenways;
(IV) Provide water for recreational purposes through the acquisition of water rights or through
agreements with holders of water rights, all in accord with applicable state water law;
(c) A program to identify, acquire and manage unique open space and natural areas of statewide
significance through grants to the Colorado Divisions of Parks and Outdoor Recreation and
Wildlife, or municipalities, counties, or other political subdivisions of the State, or non-profit
land
conservation organizations, and which will encourage cooperative investments by other public or
private entities for these purposes; and
(d) A program for grants to match local investments to acquire, develop and manage open space,
parks, and environmental education facilities, and which will encourage cooperative investments
by other public or private entities for these purposes.


 2. Trust Fund created

A fund to be known as the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund, referred to in this article as the
"Trust Fund," is hereby created and established in the Treasury of the State of Colorado.


 3. Moneys allocated to Trust Fund

(1) Beginning with the proceeds from the fourth quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1992-1993, all
proceeds from all programs, including Lotto and every other state-supervised lottery game
operated under the authority of Article XVIII, Section 2 of the Colorado Constitution, whether by
the Colorado Lottery Commission or otherwise (such programs defined hereafter in this Article
as
"Lottery Programs"), net of prizes and expenses of the state lottery division and after a sufficient
amount of money has been reserved, as of the end of any fiscal quarter, to ensure the operation of
the lottery for the ensuing fiscal quarter (such netted proceeds defined hereafter in this Article as
"Net Proceeds") are set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously appropriated as follows, and
the Treasurer shall distribute such proceeds no less frequently than quarterly, as follows:
(a) For each quarter through the fourth quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1997-1998:
(I) to the Conservation Trust Fund and the Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation in the
amounts allocable thereto under statute as amended through January 1, 1992;
(II) to the State's Capital Construction Fund for payment of debt service due from and including
September 1, 1993, to and including November 30, 1998, on the obligations described in
Subsection (1)(c) of this Section 3, but only to the extent such debt service is due during such
period according to the terms of the documents originating such obligations, and only if such
debt
service has not been prepaid or other moneys have not been dedicated or set aside for such debt
service payments as of January 1, 1992, or thereafter; provided, however, that such obligations
may be refunded and debt service from and including September 1, 1993, or the date of such
refunding, if later, on any such refunding obligation shall be payable from Net Proceeds, even if
payable after November 30, 1998, to the extent the debt service on such refunding obligation
does
not exceed the total amount of debt service payable on the applicable refunded obligation from
and including September 1, 1993, or from the date of such refunding, if later, to and including
November 30, 1998, according to the terms of the documents originating the applicable refunded
obligation; and
(III) The State Treasurer shall deposit all remaining Net Proceeds, if any, in trust for the Board of
the Trust Fund.
(b) For each quarter including and after the first quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1998-1999;
(I) Forty percent to the Conservation Trust Fund for distribution to municipalities and counties
and other eligible entities for parks, recreation and open space purposes;
(II) Ten percent to the Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation for the acquisition,
development
and improvement of new and existing state parks, recreation areas and recreational trails; and
(III) all remaining Net Proceeds in trust to the Board of the Trust Fund, provided, however, that
in
any state fiscal year in which the portion of the Net Proceeds which would otherwise be given in
trust to the State Board of the Trust Fund exceeds the amount of $35 million, to be adjusted each
year for changes from the 1992 Consumer Price Index--Denver, the Net Proceeds in excess of
such amount or adjusted amount shall be allocated to the General Fund of the State of Colorado.
(c)(I) The people intend that debt service on the following obligations shall continue to be
payable
from Lottery Program Net Proceeds to the extent allowed in Section 3 (1) (a) above:
(A) State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1979); Wheat Ridge, Colorado Project, in the
original principal amount of $6,895,000 (Issue A); Pueblo, Colorado Project, in the original
principal amount of $5,320,000 (Issue B); Grand Junction, Colorado Project in the original
principal amount of $4,735,000 (Issue C);
(B) original principal amount of $36,495,000 Colorado Health Facilities Authority Certificates of
Deposit (1986) (Youth Services, Developmental Disabilities Projects);
(C) original principal amount of $36,000,000 Colorado Convention Center Contract with the City
and County of Denver (1987);
(D) original principal amount of $63,025,000 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1988)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Correctional Facilities Project);
(E) original principal amount of $66,894,861.85 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1989)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Various Projects); and
(F) original principal amount of $28,635,000 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1990)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Additional Projects).
(II) Except to the extent allowed in Section 3 (1) (a) above for refunding   obligations, debt
service
on obligations originated on or after January 1, 1992, shall not be payable from Net Proceeds.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3 (1) (a) above, the Board of the Trust Fund in its
sole discretion may authorize payment of Net Proceeds for additional amounts of interest above
the amounts authorized by Section 3 (1) (a) for the refunding of any of the obligations listed
above
in Section 3 (1) (c).
(e) Nothing in this Section 3 shall prohibit the General Assembly from appropriating additional
amounts from sources other than Net Proceeds or the Trust Fund for payment of the obligations
listed above in Section 3 (1) (c) (I) if Net Proceeds set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously
appropriated for such purpose by this Article are less than amounts needed for debt service on
such obligations. Debt service payable prior to September 1, 1993, according to the terms of the
documents originating such obligations shall not be paid from Net Proceeds allocated pursuant to
this Article.
(2) From July 1, 1993, the following sums of money and property, in addition to Net Proceeds as
set forth in Section 3 (1) above, are set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously appropriated in
trust to the Board of the Trust Fund:
(a) All interest derived from moneys held in the Trust Fund;
(b) Any property donated specifically to the State of Colorado for the specific purpose of
benefitting the Trust Fund, including contributions, grants, gifts, bequests, donations, and federal,
state, or local grants; and 
(c) Such other moneys as may be allocated to the Trust Fund by the General Assembly.


 4. Fund to remain inviolate

All moneys deposited in the Trust Fund shall remain in trust for the purposes set forth in this
article, and no part thereof shall be used or appropriated for any other purpose, nor made subject
to any other tax, charge, fee or restriction.


 5. Trust Fund expenditures

(1)(a) Expenditures from the Trust Fund shall be made in furtherance of the Great Outdoors
Colorado Program, and shall commence in State Fiscal Year 1993- 94. The Board of the Trust
Fund shall have the duty to assure that expenditures are made for the purposes set forth in this
section and in section 6, and that the amounts expended for each of the following purposes over a
period of years be substantially equal:
(I) Investments in the wildlife resources of Colorado through the Colorado Division of Wildlife,
including the protection and restoration of crucial wildlife habitats, appropriate programs for
maintaining Colorado's diverse wildlife heritage, wildlife watching, and educational programs
about wildlife and wildlife environment, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1)
(a)
of this article;
(II) Investments in the outdoor recreation resources of Colorado through the Colorado Division
of
Parks and Outdoor Recreation, including the State Parks System, trails, public information and
environmental education resources, and water for recreational facilities, consistent with the
purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (b) of this article;
(III) Competitive grants to the Colorado Divisions of Parks and Outdoor Recreation and Wildlife,
and to counties, municipalities or other political subdivisions of the state, or non-profit land
conservation organizations, to identify, acquire and manage open space and natural areas of
statewide significance, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (c) of this article;
and
(IV) Competitive matching grants to local governments or other entities which are eligible for
distributions from the conservation trust fund, to acquire, develop or manage open lands and
parks, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (d) of this article;
(b) Provided, however, that the State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund shall
have
the discretion (a) to direct that any portion of available revenues be reinvested in the Trust Fund
and not expended in any particular year, (b) to make other expenditures which it considers
necessary.


 6. The State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund

(1) There shall be established a State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund. The
Board shall consist of two members of the public from each congressional district, a
representative designated by the State Board of Parks and Outdoor Recreation, a representative
designated by the Colorado Wildlife Commission, and the Executive Director of the Department
of Natural Resources. The public members of the Board shall be appointed by the Governor,
subject to the consent of the Senate, for terms of four years--provided, however, that when the
first such members are appointed, one of the public members from each congressional district
shall be appointed for a two-year term, to assure staggered terms of office thereafter. At least two
members shall reside west of the Continental Divide. At least one member shall represent
agricultural interests. The public members of the board shall be entitled to a reasonable per diem
compensation to be determined by the Board plus their actual expenses for each meeting of the
Board or a committee of the Board. The Board's composition shall reflect, to the extent practical,
Colorado's gender, ethnic and racial diversity, and no two of the representatives of any one
congressional district shall be members of the same political party. Members of the Board shall
be
subject to removal as provided in Article IV, Section 6 of this constitution.
(2) The Board shall be responsible for, and shall have the power to undertake the following
actions:
(a) To direct the Treasurer to disburse expendable income from the Trust Fund as the Board may
determine by resolution, and otherwise to administer the Trust Fund, provided, however, that the
Board shall not have the power to acquire any interest in real property other than (I) temporarily
to
hold real property donated to it and (II) to acquire leased office space;
(b) To promulgate rules and regulations as are necessary or expedient for the conduct of its
affairs
and its meetings and of meetings of any committees and generally for the administration of this
article, provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall give the public an opportunity to
comment on the general policies of the Board and upon specific grant proposals before the
Board;
(c) To cause to be published and distributed an annual report, including a financial report, to the
citizens, the Governor and the General Assembly of Colorado, which will set out the Board's
progress in administering the funds appropriated to it, and the Board's objectives and its budget
for the forthcoming year, and to consult with the General Assembly from time to time concerning
its objectives and its budget;
(d) To administer the distribution of grants pursuant to Sections 1 (1) (c), 1 (1) (d), 5 (1) (a) (III),
and 5 (1) (a) (IV) of this article, with the expense of administering said grants to be defrayed
from
the funds made available to the program elements of said sections;
(e) Commencing July 1, 1993, to determine what portions, if any, of moneys allocated to the
Trust
Fund should be invested in an interest-bearing Trust Fund account by the Treasurer of the State
of
Colorado, to remain in the Trust Fund and available for expenditure in future years;
(f) To employ such staff and to contract for such office space and acquire such equipment and
supplies and enter into such other contracts as it may consider necessary from time to time to
accomplish its purposes, and to pay the cost thereof from the funds appropriated to the Board
under this article, provided, however, that to the extent it is reasonably feasible to do so the
Board
shall (I) contract with the Colorado Department of Natural Resources or other state agency for
necessary administrative support and (II) endeavor to keep the level of administrative expense as
low as may be practicable in comparison with its expenditures for the purposes set forth in
Section
1 of this article, and the Board may contract with the State Personnel Board or any successor
thereof for personnel services.
(3) The Board shall be a political subdivision of the state, and shall have all the duties, privileges,
immunities, rights, liabilities and disabilities of a political subdivision of the state, provided,
however, that its organization, powers, revenues and expenses shall not be affected by any order
or resolution of the general assembly, except as provided in this constitution. It shall not be an
agency of state government, nor shall it be subject to administrative direction by any department,
commission, board, bureau or agency of the state, except to the extent provided in this
constitution. The Board shall be subject to annual audit by the state auditor, whose report shall be
a public document. The Board shall adopt rules permitting public access to its meetings and
records which are no less restrictive than state laws applicable to state agencies, as such laws
may
be amended from time to time. The Board members, officers and directors of the Board shall
have
no personal liability for any actions or refusal to act by the Board as long as such action or refusal
to act did not involve willful or intentional malfeasance or gross negligence.


 8. No substitution allowed

The people intend that the allocation of lottery funds required by this article of the constitution be
in addition to and not a substitute for funds otherwise appropriated from the General Assembly to
the Colorado Department of Natural Resources and its divisions.


 9. Eminent domain

No moneys received by any state agency pursuant to this article shall be used to acquire real
property by condemnation through the power of eminent domain.


 10. Payment in lieu of taxes

Any acquisitions of real property made by a state agency pursuant to this article shall be subject
to
payments in lieu of taxes to counties in which said acquisitions are made. Such payments shall be
made from moneys made available by the Trust Fund, and shall not exceed the rate of taxation
for
comparable property classifications.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 256 001.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 1. Great Outdoors Colorado Program

(1) The people of the State of Colorado intend that the net proceeds of every state-supervised
lottery game operated under the authority of Article XVIII, Section 2 shall be guaranteed and
permanently dedicated to the preservation, protection, enhancement and management of the
state's
wildlife, park, river, trail and open space heritage, except as specifically provided in this article.
Accordingly, there shall be established the Great Outdoors Colorado Program to preserve,
protect,
enhance and manage the state's wildlife, park, river, trail and open space heritage. The Great
Outdoors Colorado Program shall include:
(a) Wildlife program grants which:
(I) Develop wildlife watching opportunities;
(II) Implement educational programs about wildlife and wildlife environment;
(III) Provide appropriate programs for maintaining Colorado's diverse wildlife heritage;
(IV) Protect crucial wildlife habitats through the acquisition of lands, leases or easements and
restore critical areas;
(b) Outdoor recreation program grants which:
(I) Establish and improve state parks and recreation areas throughout the State of Colorado;
(II) Develop appropriate public information and environmental education resources on
Colorado's
natural resources at state parks, recreation areas, and other locations throughout the state;
(III) Acquire, construct and maintain trails and river greenways;
(IV) Provide water for recreational purposes through the acquisition of water rights or through
agreements with holders of water rights, all in accord with applicable state water law;
(c) A program to identify, acquire and manage unique open space and natural areas of statewide
significance through grants to the Colorado Divisions of Parks and Outdoor Recreation and
Wildlife, or municipalities, counties, or other political subdivisions of the State, or non-profit
land
conservation organizations, and which will encourage cooperative investments by other public or
private entities for these purposes; and
(d) A program for grants to match local investments to acquire, develop and manage open space,
parks, and environmental education facilities, and which will encourage cooperative investments
by other public or private entities for these purposes.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 257 002.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 2. Trust Fund created

A fund to be known as the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund, referred to in this article as the
"Trust Fund," is hereby created and established in the Treasury of the State of Colorado.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 258 003.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 3. Moneys allocated to Trust Fund

(1) Beginning with the proceeds from the fourth quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1992-1993, all
proceeds from all programs, including Lotto and every other state-supervised lottery game
operated under the authority of Article XVIII, Section 2 of the Colorado Constitution, whether by
the Colorado Lottery Commission or otherwise (such programs defined hereafter in this Article
as
"Lottery Programs"), net of prizes and expenses of the state lottery division and after a sufficient
amount of money has been reserved, as of the end of any fiscal quarter, to ensure the operation of
the lottery for the ensuing fiscal quarter (such netted proceeds defined hereafter in this Article as
"Net Proceeds") are set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously appropriated as follows, and
the Treasurer shall distribute such proceeds no less frequently than quarterly, as follows:
(a) For each quarter through the fourth quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1997-1998:
(I) to the Conservation Trust Fund and the Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation in the
amounts allocable thereto under statute as amended through January 1, 1992;
(II) to the State's Capital Construction Fund for payment of debt service due from and including
September 1, 1993, to and including November 30, 1998, on the obligations described in
Subsection (1)(c) of this Section 3, but only to the extent such debt service is due during such
period according to the terms of the documents originating such obligations, and only if such
debt
service has not been prepaid or other moneys have not been dedicated or set aside for such debt
service payments as of January 1, 1992, or thereafter; provided, however, that such obligations
may be refunded and debt service from and including September 1, 1993, or the date of such
refunding, if later, on any such refunding obligation shall be payable from Net Proceeds, even if
payable after November 30, 1998, to the extent the debt service on such refunding obligation
does
not exceed the total amount of debt service payable on the applicable refunded obligation from
and including September 1, 1993, or from the date of such refunding, if later, to and including
November 30, 1998, according to the terms of the documents originating the applicable refunded
obligation; and
(III) The State Treasurer shall deposit all remaining Net Proceeds, if any, in trust for the Board of
the Trust Fund.
(b) For each quarter including and after the first quarter of the State's Fiscal Year 1998-1999;
(I) Forty percent to the Conservation Trust Fund for distribution to municipalities and counties
and other eligible entities for parks, recreation and open space purposes;
(II) Ten percent to the Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation for the acquisition,
development
and improvement of new and existing state parks, recreation areas and recreational trails; and
(III) all remaining Net Proceeds in trust to the Board of the Trust Fund, provided, however, that
in
any state fiscal year in which the portion of the Net Proceeds which would otherwise be given in
trust to the State Board of the Trust Fund exceeds the amount of $35 million, to be adjusted each
year for changes from the 1992 Consumer Price Index--Denver, the Net Proceeds in excess of
such amount or adjusted amount shall be allocated to the General Fund of the State of Colorado.
(c)(I) The people intend that debt service on the following obligations shall continue to be
payable
from Lottery Program Net Proceeds to the extent allowed in Section 3 (1) (a) above:
(A) State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1979); Wheat Ridge, Colorado Project, in the
original principal amount of $6,895,000 (Issue A); Pueblo, Colorado Project, in the original
principal amount of $5,320,000 (Issue B); Grand Junction, Colorado Project in the original
principal amount of $4,735,000 (Issue C);
(B) original principal amount of $36,495,000 Colorado Health Facilities Authority Certificates of
Deposit (1986) (Youth Services, Developmental Disabilities Projects);
(C) original principal amount of $36,000,000 Colorado Convention Center Contract with the City
and County of Denver (1987);
(D) original principal amount of $63,025,000 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1988)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Correctional Facilities Project);
(E) original principal amount of $66,894,861.85 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1989)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Various Projects); and
(F) original principal amount of $28,635,000 State of Colorado Certificates of Deposit (1990)
Master Lease Purchase Agreement (Additional Projects).
(II) Except to the extent allowed in Section 3 (1) (a) above for refunding   obligations, debt
service
on obligations originated on or after January 1, 1992, shall not be payable from Net Proceeds.
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3 (1) (a) above, the Board of the Trust Fund in its
sole discretion may authorize payment of Net Proceeds for additional amounts of interest above
the amounts authorized by Section 3 (1) (a) for the refunding of any of the obligations listed
above
in Section 3 (1) (c).
(e) Nothing in this Section 3 shall prohibit the General Assembly from appropriating additional
amounts from sources other than Net Proceeds or the Trust Fund for payment of the obligations
listed above in Section 3 (1) (c) (I) if Net Proceeds set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously
appropriated for such purpose by this Article are less than amounts needed for debt service on
such obligations. Debt service payable prior to September 1, 1993, according to the terms of the
documents originating such obligations shall not be paid from Net Proceeds allocated pursuant to
this Article.
(2) From July 1, 1993, the following sums of money and property, in addition to Net Proceeds as
set forth in Section 3 (1) above, are set aside, allocated, allotted, and continuously appropriated in
trust to the Board of the Trust Fund:
(a) All interest derived from moneys held in the Trust Fund;
(b) Any property donated specifically to the State of Colorado for the specific purpose of
benefitting the Trust Fund, including contributions, grants, gifts, bequests, donations, and federal,
state, or local grants; and 
(c) Such other moneys as may be allocated to the Trust Fund by the General Assembly.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 259 004.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 4. Fund to remain inviolate

All moneys deposited in the Trust Fund shall remain in trust for the purposes set forth in this
article, and no part thereof shall be used or appropriated for any other purpose, nor made subject
to any other tax, charge, fee or restriction.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 260 005.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 5. Trust Fund expenditures

(1)(a) Expenditures from the Trust Fund shall be made in furtherance of the Great Outdoors
Colorado Program, and shall commence in State Fiscal Year 1993- 94. The Board of the Trust
Fund shall have the duty to assure that expenditures are made for the purposes set forth in this
section and in section 6, and that the amounts expended for each of the following purposes over a
period of years be substantially equal:
(I) Investments in the wildlife resources of Colorado through the Colorado Division of Wildlife,
including the protection and restoration of crucial wildlife habitats, appropriate programs for
maintaining Colorado's diverse wildlife heritage, wildlife watching, and educational programs
about wildlife and wildlife environment, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1)
(a)
of this article;
(II) Investments in the outdoor recreation resources of Colorado through the Colorado Division
of
Parks and Outdoor Recreation, including the State Parks System, trails, public information and
environmental education resources, and water for recreational facilities, consistent with the
purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (b) of this article;
(III) Competitive grants to the Colorado Divisions of Parks and Outdoor Recreation and Wildlife,
and to counties, municipalities or other political subdivisions of the state, or non-profit land
conservation organizations, to identify, acquire and manage open space and natural areas of
statewide significance, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (c) of this article;
and
(IV) Competitive matching grants to local governments or other entities which are eligible for
distributions from the conservation trust fund, to acquire, develop or manage open lands and
parks, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 1 (1) (d) of this article;
(b) Provided, however, that the State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund shall
have
the discretion (a) to direct that any portion of available revenues be reinvested in the Trust Fund
and not expended in any particular year, (b) to make other expenditures which it considers
necessary.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 261 006.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 6. The State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund

(1) There shall be established a State Board of the Great Outdoors Colorado Trust Fund. The
Board shall consist of two members of the public from each congressional district, a
representative designated by the State Board of Parks and Outdoor Recreation, a representative
designated by the Colorado Wildlife Commission, and the Executive Director of the Department
of Natural Resources. The public members of the Board shall be appointed by the Governor,
subject to the consent of the Senate, for terms of four years--provided, however, that when the
first such members are appointed, one of the public members from each congressional district
shall be appointed for a two-year term, to assure staggered terms of office thereafter. At least two
members shall reside west of the Continental Divide. At least one member shall represent
agricultural interests. The public members of the board shall be entitled to a reasonable per diem
compensation to be determined by the Board plus their actual expenses for each meeting of the
Board or a committee of the Board. The Board's composition shall reflect, to the extent practical,
Colorado's gender, ethnic and racial diversity, and no two of the representatives of any one
congressional district shall be members of the same political party. Members of the Board shall
be
subject to removal as provided in Article IV, Section 6 of this constitution.
(2) The Board shall be responsible for, and shall have the power to undertake the following
actions:
(a) To direct the Treasurer to disburse expendable income from the Trust Fund as the Board may
determine by resolution, and otherwise to administer the Trust Fund, provided, however, that the
Board shall not have the power to acquire any interest in real property other than (I) temporarily
to
hold real property donated to it and (II) to acquire leased office space;
(b) To promulgate rules and regulations as are necessary or expedient for the conduct of its
affairs
and its meetings and of meetings of any committees and generally for the administration of this
article, provided, however, that such rules and regulations shall give the public an opportunity to
comment on the general policies of the Board and upon specific grant proposals before the
Board;
(c) To cause to be published and distributed an annual report, including a financial report, to the
citizens, the Governor and the General Assembly of Colorado, which will set out the Board's
progress in administering the funds appropriated to it, and the Board's objectives and its budget
for the forthcoming year, and to consult with the General Assembly from time to time concerning
its objectives and its budget;
(d) To administer the distribution of grants pursuant to Sections 1 (1) (c), 1 (1) (d), 5 (1) (a) (III),
and 5 (1) (a) (IV) of this article, with the expense of administering said grants to be defrayed
from
the funds made available to the program elements of said sections;
(e) Commencing July 1, 1993, to determine what portions, if any, of moneys allocated to the
Trust
Fund should be invested in an interest-bearing Trust Fund account by the Treasurer of the State
of
Colorado, to remain in the Trust Fund and available for expenditure in future years;
(f) To employ such staff and to contract for such office space and acquire such equipment and
supplies and enter into such other contracts as it may consider necessary from time to time to
accomplish its purposes, and to pay the cost thereof from the funds appropriated to the Board
under this article, provided, however, that to the extent it is reasonably feasible to do so the
Board
shall (I) contract with the Colorado Department of Natural Resources or other state agency for
necessary administrative support and (II) endeavor to keep the level of administrative expense as
low as may be practicable in comparison with its expenditures for the purposes set forth in
Section
1 of this article, and the Board may contract with the State Personnel Board or any successor
thereof for personnel services.
(3) The Board shall be a political subdivision of the state, and shall have all the duties, privileges,
immunities, rights, liabilities and disabilities of a political subdivision of the state, provided,
however, that its organization, powers, revenues and expenses shall not be affected by any order
or resolution of the general assembly, except as provided in this constitution. It shall not be an
agency of state government, nor shall it be subject to administrative direction by any department,
commission, board, bureau or agency of the state, except to the extent provided in this
constitution. The Board shall be subject to annual audit by the state auditor, whose report shall be
a public document. The Board shall adopt rules permitting public access to its meetings and
records which are no less restrictive than state laws applicable to state agencies, as such laws
may
be amended from time to time. The Board members, officers and directors of the Board shall
have
no personal liability for any actions or refusal to act by the Board as long as such action or refusal
to act did not involve willful or intentional malfeasance or gross negligence.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 262 008.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 8. No substitution allowed

The people intend that the allocation of lottery funds required by this article of the constitution be
in addition to and not a substitute for funds otherwise appropriated from the General Assembly to
the Colorado Department of Natural Resources and its divisions.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 263 009.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 9. Eminent domain

No moneys received by any state agency pursuant to this article shall be used to acquire real
property by condemnation through the power of eminent domain.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 264 010.0 027.0 0 CO 1876 1993 ***

 10. Payment in lieu of taxes

Any acquisitions of real property made by a state agency pursuant to this article shall be subject
to
payments in lieu of taxes to counties in which said acquisitions are made. Such payments shall be
made from moneys made available by the Trust Fund, and shall not exceed the rate of taxation
for
comparable property classifications.

[Approved by the voters on Nov. 3, 1992; effective when proclaimed by the governor on  Jan. 14,
1993.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 265 019.0 002.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 19. Right to bail   exceptions. (1) All persons shall be bailable by sufficient sureties
pending disposition of charges except: 

(a) For capital offenses when proof is evident or presumption is great; or 

(b) When, after a hearing held within ninety six hours of arrest and upon reasonable notice, the
court finds that proof is evident or presumption is great as to the crime alleged to have been
committed and finds that the public would be placed in significant peril if the accused were
released on bail and such person is accused in any of the following cases: 

(I) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed while on probation or parole resulting from the conviction of a crime of violence; 

(II) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed while on bail pending the disposition of a previous crime of violence charge for
which
probable cause has been found; 

(III) A crime of violence, as may be defined by the general assembly, alleged to have been
committed after two previous felony convictions, or one such previous felony conviction if such
conviction was for a crime of violence, upon charges separately brought and tried under the laws
of this state or under the laws of any other state, the United States, or any territory subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States which, if committed in this state, would be a felony; or 

(c) (Deleted by amendment.) 

(2) Except in the case of a capital offense, if a person is denied bail under this section, the trial of
the person shall be commenced not more than ninety days after the date on which bail is denied.
If
the trial is not commenced within ninety days and the delay is not attributable to the defense, the
court shall immediately schedule a bail hearing and shall set the amount of the bail for the
person. 

(2.5) (a) The court may grant bail after a person is convicted, pending sentencing or appeal, only
as provided by statute as enacted by the general assembly; except that no bail is allowed for
persons convicted of: 

(I) Murder; 

(II) Any felony sexual assault involving the use of a deadly weapon; 

(III) Any felony sexual assault committed against a child who is under fifteen years of age; 

(IV) A crime of violence, as defined by statute enacted by the general assembly; or 

(V) Any felony during the commission of which the person used a firearm. 

(b) The court shall not set bail that is otherwise allowed pursuant to this subsection (2.5) unless
the court finds that: 

(I) The person is unlikely to flee and does not pose a danger to the safety of any person or the
community; and 

(II) The appeal is not frivolous or is not pursued for the purpose of delay. 

(3) This section shall take effect January 1, 1995, and shall apply to offenses committed on or
after said date. 

[ Repealed and reenacted, with amendments, November 2, 1982    Effective January 1, 1983.
(See
L. 82, p. 685.); as amended November 8, 1994    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 19, 1995. ]

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 266 001.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 1. General assembly   initiative and referendum. (1) The legislative power of the state
shall be vested in the general assembly consisting of a senate and house of representatives, both
to
be elected by the people, but the people reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and
amendments to the constitution and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the
general assembly and also reserve power at their own option to approve or reject at the polls any
act or item, section, or part of any act of the general assembly. 

(2) The first power hereby reserved by the people is the initiative, and signatures by registered
electors in an amount equal to at least five percent of the total number of votes cast for all
candidates for the office of secretary of state at the previous general election shall be required to
propose any measure by petition, and every such petition shall include the full text of the measure
so proposed. Initiative petitions for state legislation and amendments to the constitution, in such
form as may be prescribed pursuant to law, shall be addressed to and filed with the secretary of
state at least three months before the general election at which they are to be voted upon. 

(3) The second power hereby reserved is the referendum, and it may be ordered, except as to laws
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, and
appropriations
for the support and maintenance of the departments of state and state institutions, against any act
or item, section, or part of any act of the general assembly, either by a petition signed by
registered
electors in an amount equal to at least five percent of the total number of votes cast for all
candidates for the office of the secretary of state at the previous general election or by the general
assembly. Referendum petitions, in such form as may be prescribed pursuant to law, shall be
addressed to and filed with the secretary of state not more than ninety days after the final
adjournment of the session of the general assembly that passed the bill on which the referendum
is
demanded. The filing of a referendum petition against any item, section, or part of any act shall
not delay the remainder of the act from becoming operative. 

(4) The veto power of the governor shall not extend to measures initiated by or referred to the
people. All elections on measures initiated by or referred to the people of the state shall be held at
the biennial regular general election, and all such measures shall become the law or a part of the
constitution, when approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, and not otherwise, and shall
take effect from and after the date of the official declaration of the vote thereon by proclamation
of the governor, but not later than thirty days after the vote has been canvassed. This section shall
not be construed to deprive the general assembly of the power to enact any measure. 

(5) The original draft of the text of proposed initiated constitutional amendments and initiated
laws shall be submitted to the legislative research and drafting offices of the general assembly for
review and comment. No later than two weeks after submission of the original draft, unless
withdrawn by the proponents, the legislative research and drafting offices of the general assembly
shall render their comments to the proponents of the proposed measure at a meeting open to the
public, which shall be held only after full and timely notice to the public. Such meeting shall be
held prior to the fixing of a ballot title. Neither the general assembly nor its committees or
agencies shall have any power to require the amendment, modification, or other alteration of the
text of any such proposed measure or to establish deadlines for the submission of the original
draft
of the text of any proposed measure. 

(5.5) No measure shall be proposed by petition containing more than one subject, which shall be
clearly expressed in its title; but if any subject shall be embraced in any measure which shall not
be expressed in the title, such measure shall be void only as to so much thereof as shall not be so
expressed. If a measure contains more than one subject, such that a ballot title cannot be fixed
that
clearly expresses a single subject, no title shall be set and the measure shall not be submitted to
the people for adoption or rejection at the polls. In such circumstance, however, the measure may
be revised and resubmitted for the fixing of a proper title without the necessity of review and
comment on the revised measure in accordance with subsection (5) of this section, unless the
revisions involve more than the elimination of provisions to achieve a single subject, or unless
the
official or officials responsible for the fixing of a title determine that the revisions are so
substantial that such review and comment is in the public interest. The revision and resubmission
of a measure in accordance with this subsection (5.5) shall not operate to alter or extend any
filing
deadline applicable to the measure. 

(6) The petition shall consist of sheets having such general form printed or written at the top
thereof as shall be designated or prescribed by the secretary of state; such petition shall be signed
by registered electors in their own proper persons only, to which shall be attached the residence
address of such person and the date of signing the same. To each of such petitions, which may
consist of one or more sheets, shall be attached an affidavit of some registered elector that each
signature thereon is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be and that, to the best
of the knowledge and belief of the affiant, each of the persons signing said petition was, at the
time of signing, a registered elector. Such petition so verified shall be prima facie evidence that
the signatures thereon are genuine and true and that the persons signing the same are registered
electors. 

(7) The secretary of state shall submit all measures initiated by or referred to the people for
adoption or rejection at the polls, in compliance with this section. In submitting the same and in
all matters pertaining to the form of all petitions, the secretary of state and all other officers shall
be guided by the general laws. 

(7.3) Before any election at which the voters of the entire state will vote on any initiated or
referred constitutional amendment or legislation, the nonpartisan research staff of the general
assembly shall cause to be published the text and title of every such measure. Such publication
shall be made at least one time in at least one legal publication of general circulation in each
county of the state and shall be made at least fifteen days prior to the final date of voter
registration for the election. The form and manner of publication shall be as prescribed by law
and
shall ensure a reasonable opportunity for the voters statewide to become informed about the text
and title of each measure. 

(7.5) (a) Before any election at which the voters of the entire state will vote on any initiated or
referred constitutional amendment or legislation, the nonpartisan research staff of the general
assembly shall prepare and make available to the public the following information in the form of
a
ballot information booklet: 

(I) The text and title of each measure to be voted on; 

(II) A fair and impartial analysis of each measure, which shall include a summary and the major
arguments both for and against the measure, and which may include any other information that
would assist understanding the purpose and effect of the measure. Any person may file written
comments for consideration by the research staff during the preparation of such analysis. 

(b) At least thirty days before the election, the research staff shall cause the ballot information
booklet to be distributed to active registered voters statewide. 

(c) If any measure to be voted on by the voters of the entire state includes matters arising under
section 20 of article X of this constitution, the ballot information booklet shall include the
information and the titled notice required by section 20 (3) (b) of article X, and the mailing of
such information pursuant to section 20 (3) (b) of article X is not required. 

(d) The general assembly shall provide sufficient appropriations for the preparation and
distribution of the ballot information booklet pursuant to this subsection (7.5) at no charge to
recipients. 

(8) The style of all laws adopted by the people through the initiative shall be, "Be it Enacted by
the People of the State of Colorado". 

(9) The initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people by this section are hereby further
reserved to the registered electors of every city, town, and municipality as to all local, special,
and
municipal legislation of every character in or for their respective municipalities. The manner of
exercising said powers shall be prescribed by general laws; except that cities, towns, and
municipalities may provide for the manner of exercising the initiative and referendum powers as
to their municipal legislation. Not more than ten percent of the registered electors may be
required
to order the referendum, nor more than fifteen per cent to propose any measure by the initiative
in
any city, town, or municipality. 

(10) This section of the constitution shall be in all respects self executing; except that the form of
the initiative or referendum petition may be prescribed pursuant to law.


[As amended November 8, 1910.; as amended November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 19, 1980.; as amended November 8, 1994    Effective upon
proclamation of the Governor, January 19, 1995.] 

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 267 020.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 20. The Taxpayer's Bill of Rights. 
(1) General provisions. This section takes effect December 31, 1992 or as stated. Its preferred
interpretation shall reasonably restrain most the growth of government. All provisions are
self-executing and severable and supersede conflicting state constitutional, state statutory,
charter,
or other state or local provisions. Other limits on district revenue, spending, and debt may be
weakened only by future voter approval. Individual or class action enforcement suits may be filed
and shall have the highest civil priority of resolution. Successful plaintiffs are allowed costs and
reasonable attorney fees, but a district is not unless a suit against it be ruled frivolous. Revenue
collected, kept, or spent illegally since four full fiscal years before a suit is filed shall be refunded
with 10% annual simple interest from the initial conduct. Subject to judicial review, districts may
use any reasonable method for refunds under this section, including temporary tax credits or rate
reductions. Refunds need not be proportional when prior payments are impractical to identify or
return. When annual district revenue is less than annual payments on general obligation bonds,
pensions, and final court judgments, (4) (a) and (7) shall be suspended to provide for the
deficiency.

(2) Term definitions. Within this section: (a) "Ballot issue" means a non-recall petition or
referred
measure in an election.

(b) "District" means the state or any local government, excluding enterprises.

(c) "Emergency" excludes economic conditions, revenue shortfalls, or district salary or fringe
benefit increases.

(d) "Enterprise" means a government-owned business authorized to issue its own revenue bonds
and receiving under 10% of annual revenue in grants from all Colorado state and local
governments combined.

(e) "Fiscal year spending" means all district expenditures and reserve increases except, as to both,
those for refunds made in the current or next fiscal year or those from gifts, federal funds,
collections for another government, pension contributions by employees and pension fund
earnings, reserve transfers or expenditures, damage awards, or property sales.

(f) "Inflation" means the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index.

(g) "Local growth" for a non-school district means a net percentage change in actual value of all
real property in a district from construction of taxable real property improvements, minus
destruction of similar improvements, and additions to, minus deletions from, taxable real
property. For a school district, it means the percentage change in its student enrollment.

(3) Election provisions.

(a) Ballot issues shall be decided in a state general election, biennial local district election, or on
the first Tuesday in November of odd-numbered years. Except for petitions, bonded debt, or
charter or constitutional provisions, districts may consolidate ballot issues and voters may
approve
a delay of up to four years in voting on ballot issues. District actions taken during such a delay
shall not extend beyond that period.

(b) 15-25 days before a ballot issue election, districts shall mail at the least cost, and as a package
where districts with ballot issues overlap, a titled notice or set of notices addressed to "All
Registered Voters" at each address of one or more active registered electors.  Titles shall have
this
order of preference: "NOTICE OF ELECTION TO INCREASE TAXES/TO INCREASE
DEBT/ON A CITIZEN PETITION/ON A REFERRED MEASURE." Except for district
voter-approved additions, notices shall include only:

(i) The election date, hours, ballot title, text, and local election office address and telephone
number.

(ii) For proposed district tax or bonded debt increases, the estimated or actual total of district
fiscal year spending for the current year and each of the past four years, and the overall
percentage
and dollar change.

(iii) For the first full fiscal year of each proposed district tax increase, district estimates of the
maximum dollar amount of each increase and of district fiscal year spending without the
increase.

(iv) For proposed district bonded debt, its principal amount and maximum annual and total
district
repayment cost, and the principal balance of total current district bonded debt and its maximum
annual and remaining total district repayment cost.

(v) Two summaries, up to 500 words each, one for and one against the proposal, of written
comments filed with the election officer by 30 days before the election. No summary shall
mention names of persons or private groups, nor any endorsements of or resolutions against the
proposal. Petition representatives following these rules shall write this summary for their
petition.
The election officer shall maintain and accurately summarize all other relevant written
comments.
The provisions of this subparagraph (v) do not apply to a statewide ballot issue, which is subject
to the provisions of section 1 (7.5) of article V of this constitution.

(c) Except by later voter approval, if a tax increase or fiscal year spending exceeds any estimate
in
(b) (iii) for the same fiscal year, the tax increase is thereafter reduced up to 100% in proportion to
the combined dollar excess, and the combined excess revenue refunded in the next fiscal year.
District bonded debt shall not issue on terms that could exceed its share of its maximum
repayment costs in (b) (iv). Ballot titles for tax or bonded debt increases shall begin, "SHALL
(DISTRICT) TAXES BE INCREASED (first, or if phased in, final, full fiscal year dollar
increase)
ANNUALLY...?" or "SHALL (DISTRICT) DEBT BE INCREASED (principal amount), WITH
A
REPAYMENT COST OF (maximum total district cost), ...?"

(4) Required elections. Starting November 4, 1992, districts must have voter approval in advance
for:

(a) Unless (1) or (6) applies, any new tax, tax rate increase, mill levy above that for the prior
year,
valuation for assessment ratio increase for a property class, or extension of an expiring tax, or a
tax policy change directly causing a net tax revenue gain to any district.

(b) Except for refinancing district bonded debt at a lower interest rate or adding new employees
to
existing district pension plans, creation of any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect district debt
or
other financial obligation whatsoever without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably
and held for payments in all future fiscal years.

(5) Emergency reserves. To use for declared emergencies only, each district shall reserve for
1993
1% or more, for 1994 2% or more, and for all later years 3% or more of its fiscal year spending
excluding bonded debt service. Unused reserves apply to the next year's reserve.

(6) Emergency taxes. This subsection grants no new taxing power. Emergency property taxes are
prohibited. Emergency tax revenue is excluded for purposes of (3) (c) and (7), even if later
ratified
by voters. Emergency taxes shall also meet all of the following conditions: (a) A 2/3 majority of
the members of each house of the general assembly or of a local district board declares the
emergency and imposes the tax by separate recorded roll call votes.

(b) Emergency tax revenue shall be spent only after emergency reserves are depleted, and shall be
refunded within 180 days after the emergency ends if not spent on the emergency.

(c) A tax not approved on the next election date 60 days or more after the declaration shall end
with that election month.

(7) Spending limits. (a) The maximum annual percentage change in state fiscal year spending
equals inflation plus the percentage change in state population in the prior calendar year, adjusted
for revenue changes approved by voters after 1991. Population shall be determined by annual
federal census estimates and such number shall be adjusted every decade to match the federal
census.

(b) The maximum annual percentage change in each local district's fiscal year spending equals
inflation in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(c) The maximum annual percentage change in each district's property tax revenue equals
inflation
in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for property tax revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(d) If revenue from sources not excluded from fiscal year spending exceeds these limits in dollars
for that fiscal year, the excess shall be refunded in the next fiscal year unless voters approve a
revenue change as an offset. Initial district bases are current fiscal year spending and 1991
property tax collected in 1992. Qualification or disqualification as an enterprise shall change
district bases and future year limits. Future creation of district bonded debt shall increase, and
retiring or refinancing district bonded debt shall lower, fiscal year spending and property tax
revenue by the annual debt service so funded. Debt service changes, reductions, (1) and (3) (c)
refunds, and voter-approved revenue changes are dollar amounts that are exceptions to, and not
part of, any district base. Voter-approved revenue changes do not require a tax rate change.

(8) Revenue limits. (a) New or increased transfer tax rates on real property are prohibited. No
new
state real property tax or local district income tax shall be imposed. Neither an income tax rate
increase nor a new state definition of taxable income shall apply before the next tax year. Any
income tax law change after July 1, 1992 shall also require all taxable net income to be taxed at
one rate, excluding refund tax credits or voter-approved tax credits, with no added tax or
surcharge.

(b) Each district may enact cumulative uniform exemptions and credits to reduce or end business
personal property taxes.

(c) Regardless of reassessment frequency, valuation notices shall be mailed annually and may be
appealed annually, with no presumption in favor of any pending valuation. Past or future sales by
a lender or government shall also be considered as comparable market sales and their sales prices
kept as public records. Actual value shall be stated on all property tax bills and valuation notices
and, for residential real property, determined solely by the market approach to appraisal.

(9) State mandates. Except for public education through grade 12 or as required of a local district
by federal law, a local district may reduce or end its subsidy to any program delegated to it by the
general assembly for administration. For current programs, the state may require 90 days notice
and that the adjustment occur in a maximum of three equal annual installments.

[Enacted by the People November 3, 1992 -- Section 1 of article V of this constitution provides
that initiated measures shall take effect upon the Governor's proclamation. Subsection (1) of this
section provides that this section shall take effect December 31, 1992, or as stated. (See
subsection (4).) The Governor's proclamation was signed January 14, 1993.; section 20 (3)(b)(v)
amended November 8, 1994 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 19, 1995.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 268 009.A 018.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 9a. U.S. senators and representatives   limitations on terms. (1) In order to broaden the
opportunities for public service and to assure that members of the United States Congress from
Colorado are representative of and responsible to Colorado citizens, no United States Senator
from Colorado shall serve more than two consecutive terms in the United States Senate, and no
United States Representative from Colorado shall serve more than three consecutive terms in the
United States House of Representatives. This limitation on the number of terms shall apply to
terms of office beginning on or after January 1, 1995. Any person appointed or elected to fill a
vacancy in the United States Congress and who serves at least one half of a term of office shall
be
considered to have served a term in that office for purposes of this subsection (1). Terms are
considered consecutive unless they are at least four years apart. 

(2) The people of Colorado hereby state their support for a nationwide limit of twelve
consecutive
years of service in the United States Senate and six consecutive years of service in the United
States House of Representatives and instruct their public officials to use their best efforts to work
for such a limit. 

(3) The people of Colorado declare that the provisions of this section shall be deemed severable
from the remainder of this measure and that their intention is that federal officials elected from
Colorado will continue voluntarily to observe the wishes of the people as stated in this section in
the event any provision thereof is held invalid. The severability provisions of Section 10 of
Article
XVIII of the Colorado Constitution apply to this Section 9a.

[Adopted by the People November 6, 1990    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 3, 1991. amended by the People November 8, 1994,    Effective upon proclamation of
the
Governor, January 19, 1995.] 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 269 011.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 11. Elected government officials   limitation on terms. (1) In order to broaden the
opportunities for public service and to assure that elected officials of governments are responsive
to the citizens of those governments, no nonjudicial elected official of any county, city and
county, city, town, school district, service authority, or any other political subdivision of the State
of Colorado, no member of the state board of education, and no elected member of the governing
board of a state institution of higher education shall serve more than two consecutive terms in
office, except that with respect to terms of office which are two years or shorter in duration, no
such elected official shall serve more than three consecutive terms in office. This limitation on
the
number of terms shall apply to terms of office beginning on or after January 1, 1995. For
purposes
of this Section 11, terms are considered consecutive unless they are at least four years apart. 

(2) The voters of any such political subdivision may lengthen, shorten or eliminate the limitations
on terms of office imposed by this Section 11. The voters of the state may lengthen, shorten, or
eliminate the limitations on terms of office for the state board of education or the governing
board
of a state institution of higher education imposed by this Section 11. 

(3) The provisions of this Section 11 shall apply to every home rule county, home rule city and
county, home rule city and home rule town, notwithstanding any provision of Article XX, or
Sections 16 and 17 of Article XIV, of the Colorado Constitution.


[As enacted by the people November 8, 1994    Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January 19, 1995.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 270 002.0 019.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 2. Amendments to constitution   how adopted. (1) Any amendment or amendments to
this
constitution may be proposed in either house of the general assembly, and, if the same shall be
voted for by two thirds of all the members elected to each house, such proposed amendment or
amendments, together with the ayes and noes of each house thereon, shall be entered in full on
their respective journals. The proposed amendment or amendments shall be published with the
laws of that session of the general assembly. At the next general election for members of the
general assembly, the said amendment or amendments shall be submitted to the registered
electors
of the state for their approval or rejection, and such as are approved by a majority of those voting
thereon shall become part of this constitution. 

(2) If more than one amendment be submitted at any general election, each of said amendments
shall be voted upon separately and votes thereon cast shall be separately counted the same as
though but one amendment was submitted; but each general assembly shall have no power to
propose amendments to more than six articles of this constitution. 

(3) No measure proposing an amendment or amendments to this constitution shall be submitted
by the general assembly to the registered electors of the state containing more than one subject,
which shall be clearly expressed in its title; but if any subject shall be embraced in any measure
which shall not be expressed in the title, such measure shall be void only as to so much thereof as
shall not be so expressed.

[As amended November 6, 1900.; as amended November 4, 1980    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 19, 1980.; as amended November 8, 1994    Effective upon
proclamation of the Governor, January 19, 1995.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 271 001.0 023.0 0 CO 1876 1995 ***

Section 1. Publication of proposed constitutional amendments and initiated and referred bills.

[Repealed November 8, 1994   Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 19, 1995.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 272 009.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1996 ***

Section 9. State board of land commissioners. (1) The state board of land commissioners shall be
composed of five persons to be appointed by the governor, with the consent of the senate, one of
whom shall be elected by the board as its president.  

(2) The governor shall endeavor to appoint members of the board who reside in different
geographic regions of the state. The board shall be composed of one person with substantial
experience in production agriculture, one person with substantial experience in public primary or
secondary education, one person with substantial experience in local government and land use
planning, one person with substantial experience in natural resource conservation, and one
citizen
at large.

(3) The governor shall appoint a new board of land Commissioners on or before May 1, 1997.
The
term of each member shall be for four years; except that of the first board members appointed
under this subsection (3), two members shall be appointed for terms that expire June 30, 1999,
and three members shall be appointed for terms that expire June 30, 2001. The terms of office of
the members of the board appointed prior to the effective date of this subsection (3) shall expire
upon the confirmation of the first three members of the board appointed under this subsection
(3).
No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. Members of the board shall be subject
to removal, and vacancies of the board shall be filled, as provided in article IV, section 6 of this
constitution.

(4) The board shall, pursuant to section 13 of article XII of this constitution, hire a director with
the consent of the governor; and, through the director, a staff, and may contract for office space,
acquire equipment and supplies, and enter into contracts as necessary to accomplish its duties.
Payments for goods, services, and personnel shall be made from the income from the trusts lands.
The general assembly shall annually appropriate from the income from the trusts lands, sufficient
moneys to enable the board to perform its duties and in that regard shall give deference to the
board's assessment of its budgetary needs. The members of the board shall not, by virtue of their
appointment, be employees of the state, they may be reimbursed for their necessary and
reasonable expenses and may, in addition, receive such per diem as may be established by the
general assembly, from the income from trust lands.

(5) The individual members of the board shall have no personal liability for any action or failure
to act as long as such action or failure to act does not involve willful for intentional malfeasance
or gross negligence.

(6) The board shall serve as the trustee for the lands granted to the state in public trust by the
federal government, lands acquired in lieu thereof, and additional lands held by the board in
public trust. It shall have the duty to manage, control, and dispose of such lands in accordance
with the purposes for which said grants of land were made and section 10 of this article IX, and
subject to such terms and conditions consistent therewith as may be prescribed by law.

(7) The board shall have the authority to undertake nonsimultaneous exchanges of land, by
directing that the proceeds from a particular sale or other disposition be deposited into a separate
account to be established by the state treasurer with the interest thereon to accrue to such
account,
and withdrawing therefrom an equal or lesser amount to be used as the purchase price for the
other land to be held and managed as provided in this article, provided that the purchase of lands
to complete such an exchange shall be made within two years of the initial sale or disposition.
Any proceeds, and the interest thereon, from a sale or other disposition which are not expended
in
completing the exchange shall be transferred by the state treasurer to the public school fund or
such other trust fund maintained by the treasurer for the proceeds of the trust lands disposed of or
sold. Moneys held in separate account shall not be used for the operating expenses of the board
or
for expenses incident to the disposition or acquisition of lands.

[As Amended December 26, 1996.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 273 010.0 009.0 0 CO 1876 1996 ***

Section 10.  Selection and control of public lands.  
(1) The people of the state of Colorado recognize (a) that the state school lands are an
endowment
of land assets held in a perpetual, inter-generational public trust for the support of public schools,
which should not be significantly diminished, (b) that the disposition and use of such lands
should
therefore benefit public schools including local school districts, and (c) that the economic
productivity of all lands held in public trust is dependent on sound stewardship, including
protecting and enhancing the beauty, natural values, open space and wildlife habitat thereof, for
this and future generations. In recognition of these principles, the board shall be governed by the
standards set forth in this section 10 in the discharge of its fiduciary obligations, in addition to
other laws generally applicable to trustees.

It shall be the duty of the state board of land commissioners to provide for the prudent
management, location, protection, sale, exchange, or other disposition of all the lands heretofore,
or which may hereafter be, held by the board as trustee pursuant to section 9(6) of this article IX,
in order to produce reasonable and consistent income over time. In furtherance thereof, the board
shall:

(a) Prior to the lease, sale, or exchange of any lands for commercial, residential or industrial
development, determine that the income from the lease, sale, or exchange can reasonably be
anticipated to exceed the fiscal impact of such development on local school districts and state
funding of education from increased school enrollment associated with such development;

(b) Protect and enhance the long-term productivity and sound stewardship of the trust lands held
by the board, by, among other activities:

(I) Establishing and maintaining a long-term stewardship trust of up to 300,000 acres of land that
the board determines through a statewide public nomination process to be valuable primarily to
preserve long-term benefits and returns to the state; which trust shall be held and managed to
maximize options for continued stewardship, public use, or future disposition, by permitting only
those uses, not necessarily precluding existing uses or management practices, that will protect
and
enhance the beauty, natural values, open space, and wildlife habitat thereof; at least 200,000
acres
of which land shall be designated on or before January 1, 1999, and at least an additional 95,000
acres of which land shall be designated on or before January 1, 2001; specific parcels of land
held
in the stewardship trust may be removed from the trust only upon the affirmative vote of four
members of the board and upon the designation or exchange of an equal or greater amount of
additional land into said trust.

(II) Including in agricultural leases terms, incentives, and lease rates that will promote sound
stewardship and land management practices, long-term agricultural productivity, and community
stability;

(III) Managing the development and utilization of natural resources in a manner which will
conserve the long-term value of such resources, as well as existing and future uses, and in
accordance with state and local laws and regulations; and (IV) Selling or leasing conservation
easements, licenses and other similar interests in land.

(c) Comply with valid local land use regulations and land use plans.

(d) Allow access by public schools without charge for outdoor educational purposes so long as
such access does not conflict with uses previously approved by the board on such lands.

(e) Provide opportunities for the public school districts within which such lands are located to
lease, purchase, or otherwise use such lands or portions thereof as are necessary for school
building sites, at an amount to be determined by the board, which shall not exceed the appraised
fair market value, which amount may be paid over time.

(2) No law shall ever be passed by the general assembly granting any privileges to persons who
may have settled upon any such public trust lands subsequent to the survey thereof by the general
government, by which the amount to be derived by the sale, or other disposition of such lands,
shall be diminished, directly or indirectly.

[Enacted by the people November 5, 1996 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 26, 1996.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 274 020.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 1996 ***

Section 20. The Taxpayer's Bill of Rights. 
(1) General provisions. This section takes effect December 31, 1992 or as stated. Its preferred
interpretation shall reasonably restrain most the growth of government. All provisions are
self-executing and severable and supersede conflicting state constitutional, state statutory,
charter,
or other state or local provisions. Other limits on district revenue, spending, and debt may be
weakened only by future voter approval. Individual or class action enforcement suits may be filed
and shall have the highest civil priority of resolution. Successful plaintiffs are allowed costs and
reasonable attorney fees, but a district is not unless a suit against it be ruled frivolous. Revenue
collected, kept, or spent illegally since four full fiscal years before a suit is filed shall be refunded
with 10% annual simple interest from the initial conduct. Subject to judicial review, districts may
use any reasonable method for refunds under this section, including temporary tax credits or rate
reductions. Refunds need not be proportional when prior payments are impractical to identify or
return. When annual district revenue is less than annual payments on general obligation bonds,
pensions, and final court judgments, (4) (a) and (7) shall be suspended to provide for the
deficiency.

(2) Term definitions. Within this section: (a) "Ballot issue" means a non-recall petition or
referred
measure in an election.

(b) "District" means the state or any local government, excluding enterprises.

(c) "Emergency" excludes economic conditions, revenue shortfalls, or district salary or fringe
benefit increases.

(d) "Enterprise" means a government-owned business authorized to issue its own revenue bonds
and receiving under 10% of annual revenue in grants from all Colorado state and local
governments combined.

(e) "Fiscal year spending" means all district expenditures and reserve increases except, as to both,
those for refunds made in the current or next fiscal year or those from gifts, federal funds,
collections for another government, pension contributions by employees and pension fund
earnings, reserve transfers or expenditures, damage awards, or property sales.

(f) "Inflation" means the percentage change in the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics
Consumer Price Index for Denver-Boulder, all items, all urban consumers, or its successor index.

(g) "Local growth" for a non-school district means a net percentage change in actual value of all
real property in a district from construction of taxable real property improvements, minus
destruction of similar improvements, and additions to, minus deletions from, taxable real
property. For a school district, it means the percentage change in its student enrollment.

(3) Election provisions.

(a) Ballot issues shall be decided in a state general election, biennial local district election, or on
the first Tuesday in November of odd-numbered years. Except for petitions, bonded debt, or
charter or constitutional provisions, districts may consolidate ballot issues and voters may
approve
a delay of up to four years in voting on ballot issues. District actions taken during such a delay
shall not extend beyond that period.

(b) At least 30 days before a ballot issue election, districts shall mail at the least cost, and as a
package where districts with ballot issues overlap, a titled notice or set of notices addressed to
"All Registered Voters" at each address of one or more active registered electors. The districts
may coordinate the mailing required by this paragraph (b) with the distribution of the ballot
information booklet required by section 1 (7.5) of article V of this constitution in order to save
mailing costs. Titles shall have this order of preference: "NOTICE OF ELECTION TO
INCREASE TAXES/TO INCREASE DEBT/ON A CITIZEN PETITION/ON A REFERRED
MEASURE." Except for district voter-approved additions, notices shall include only:

(i) The election date, hours, ballot title, text, and local election office address and telephone
number.

(ii) For proposed district tax or bonded debt increases, the estimated or actual total of district
fiscal year spending for the current year and each of the past four years, and the overall
percentage
and dollar change.

(iii) For the first full fiscal year of each proposed district tax increase, district estimates of the
maximum dollar amount of each increase and of district fiscal year spending without the
increase.

(iv) For proposed district bonded debt, its principal amount and maximum annual and total
district
repayment cost, and the principal balance of total current district bonded debt and its maximum
annual and remaining total district repayment cost.

(v) Two summaries, up to 500 words each, one for and one against the proposal, of written
comments filed with the election officer by 45 days before the election. No summary shall
mention names of persons or private groups, nor any endorsements of or resolutions against the
proposal. Petition representatives following these rules shall write this summary for their
petition.
The election officer shall maintain and accurately summarize all other relevant written
comments.
The provisions of this subparagraph (v) do not apply to a statewide ballot issue, which is subject
to the provisions of section 1 (7.5) of article V of this constitution.

(c) Except by later voter approval, if a tax increase or fiscal year spending exceeds any estimate
in
(b) (iii) for the same fiscal year, the tax increase is thereafter reduced up to 100% in proportion to
the combined dollar excess, and the combined excess revenue refunded in the next fiscal year.
District bonded debt shall not issue on terms that could exceed its share of its maximum
repayment costs in (b) (iv). Ballot titles for tax or bonded debt increases shall begin, "SHALL
(DISTRICT) TAXES BE INCREASED (first, or if phased in, final, full fiscal year dollar
increase)
ANNUALLY...?" or "SHALL (DISTRICT) DEBT BE INCREASED (principal amount), WITH
A
REPAYMENT COST OF (maximum total district cost), ...?"

(4) Required elections. Starting November 4, 1992, districts must have voter approval in advance
for:

(a) Unless (1) or (6) applies, any new tax, tax rate increase, mill levy above that for the prior
year,
valuation for assessment ratio increase for a property class, or extension of an expiring tax, or a
tax policy change directly causing a net tax revenue gain to any district.

(b) Except for refinancing district bonded debt at a lower interest rate or adding new employees
to
existing district pension plans, creation of any multiple-fiscal year direct or indirect district debt
or
other financial obligation whatsoever without adequate present cash reserves pledged irrevocably
and held for payments in all future fiscal years.

(5) Emergency reserves. To use for declared emergencies only, each district shall reserve for
1993
1% or more, for 1994 2% or more, and for all later years 3% or more of its fiscal year spending
excluding bonded debt service. Unused reserves apply to the next year's reserve.

(6) Emergency taxes. This subsection grants no new taxing power. Emergency property taxes are
prohibited. Emergency tax revenue is excluded for purposes of (3) (c) and (7), even if later
ratified
by voters. Emergency taxes shall also meet all of the following conditions: (a) A 2/3 majority of
the members of each house of the general assembly or of a local district board declares the
emergency and imposes the tax by separate recorded roll call votes.

(b) Emergency tax revenue shall be spent only after emergency reserves are depleted, and shall be
refunded within 180 days after the emergency ends if not spent on the emergency.

(c) A tax not approved on the next election date 60 days or more after the declaration shall end
with that election month.

(7) Spending limits. (a) The maximum annual percentage change in state fiscal year spending
equals inflation plus the percentage change in state population in the prior calendar year, adjusted
for revenue changes approved by voters after 1991. Population shall be determined by annual
federal census estimates and such number shall be adjusted every decade to match the federal
census.

(b) The maximum annual percentage change in each local district's fiscal year spending equals
inflation in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(c) The maximum annual percentage change in each district's property tax revenue equals
inflation
in the prior calendar year plus annual local growth, adjusted for property tax revenue changes
approved by voters after 1991 and (8) (b) and (9) reductions.

(d) If revenue from sources not excluded from fiscal year spending exceeds these limits in dollars
for that fiscal year, the excess shall be refunded in the next fiscal year unless voters approve a
revenue change as an offset. Initial district bases are current fiscal year spending and 1991
property tax collected in 1992. Qualification or disqualification as an enterprise shall change
district bases and future year limits. Future creation of district bonded debt shall increase, and
retiring or refinancing district bonded debt shall lower, fiscal year spending and property tax
revenue by the annual debt service so funded. Debt service changes, reductions, (1) and (3) (c)
refunds, and voter-approved revenue changes are dollar amounts that are exceptions to, and not
part of, any district base. Voter-approved revenue changes do not require a tax rate change.

(8) Revenue limits. (a) New or increased transfer tax rates on real property are prohibited. No
new
state real property tax or local district income tax shall be imposed. Neither an income tax rate
increase nor a new state definition of taxable income shall apply before the next tax year. Any
income tax law change after July 1, 1992 shall also require all taxable net income to be taxed at
one rate, excluding refund tax credits or voter-approved tax credits, with no added tax or
surcharge.

(b) Each district may enact cumulative uniform exemptions and credits to reduce or end business
personal property taxes.

(c) Regardless of reassessment frequency, valuation notices shall be mailed annually and may be
appealed annually, with no presumption in favor of any pending valuation. Past or future sales by
a lender or government shall also be considered as comparable market sales and their sales prices
kept as public records. Actual value shall be stated on all property tax bills and valuation notices
and, for residential real property, determined solely by the market approach to appraisal.

(9) State mandates. Except for public education through grade 12 or as required of a local district
by federal law, a local district may reduce or end its subsidy to any program delegated to it by the
general assembly for administration. For current programs, the state may require 90 days notice
and that the adjustment occur in a maximum of three equal annual installments.

[Enacted by the People November 3, 1992 -- Section 1 of article V of this constitution provides
that initiated measures shall take effect upon the Governor's proclamation. Subsection (1) of this
section provides that this section shall take effect December 31, 1992, or as stated. (See
subsection (4).) The Governor's proclamation was signed January 14, 1993.; section 20 (3)(b)(v)
amended November 8, 1994 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, January 19, 1995.;
the introductory portion to section 20 (3)(b) and (3)(b)(v) amended November 5, 1996 --
Effective
upon proclamation of the Governor, December 26, 1996. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 275 012.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1996 ***

Section 12.Congressional Term Limits Amendment.

(1) CONGRESSIONAL TERM LIMITS AMENDMENT.

The exact language for addition to the United States Constitution follows:

Section 1:No person shall serve in the office of United States Representative for more than three
terms, but upon ratification of this amendment no person who has held the office of United States
Representative or who then holds the office shall serve for more than two additional terms.

Section 2:No person shall serve in the office of United States Senator for more than two terms,
but upon ratification of this amendment no person who has held the office of United States
Senator or who then holds the office shall serve for more than one additional term.

Section 3:This amendment shall have no time limit within which it must be ratified to become
operative upon the ratification of the legislatures of three-fourths of the several states.

(2) VOTER INSTRUCTION TO STATE LEGISLATORS.

(a) The voters instruct each state legislator to vote to apply for an amendment-proposing
convention under Article V of the United States Constitution and to ratify the Congressional
Term
Limits Amendment when referred to the states.

(b) All election ballots shall have "DISREGARDED VOTER INSTRUCTION ON TERM
LIMITS" designated next to the name of each state legislator who fails to comply with the terms
of subsection (5)(b).

(c) Said ballot designation shall not appear after the Colorado legislature has made an Article V
application that has not been withdrawn and has ratified the Congressional Term Limits
Amendment, when proposed.

(3) VOTER INSTRUCTION TO MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.

(a) The voters instruct each member of the congressional delegation to approve the
Congressional
Term Limits Amendment.

(b) All election ballots shall have "disregarded voter instruction on term limits" designated next
to
the name of each member of Congress who fails to comply with the terms of subsection (5)(b).

(c) Said ballot designation shall not appear after the Congressional Term Limits Amendment is
before the states for ratification.

(4) VOTER INSTRUCTION TO NON-INCUMBENTS.

The words "DECLINED TO TAKE PLEDGE TO SUPPORT TERM LIMITS" shall be
designated on all primary and general election ballots next to the names of non-incumbent
candidates for United States senator, United States representative, state senator, and state
representative who have not signed the pledge to support term limits unless the Colorado
legislature has ratified the Congressional Term Limits Amendment.

The pledge shall read:

I pledge to use all my legislative powers to enact the proposed Congressional Term Limits
Amendment set forth in Article XVIII, section 12. If elected, I pledge to vote in such a way that
the designation "DISREGARDED VOTER INSTRUCTION ON TERM LIMITS" will not
appear
next to my name.

--------------------------------

Signature of Candidate

(5) DESIGNATION PROCESS.

(a) The Colorado secretary of state shall determine these ballot designations. The ballot
designation shall appear unless clear and convincing evidence establishes that the candidate has
honored voter instructions or signed the pledge in subsection (4). Challenges to designation or
lack of designation shall be filed with the Colorado supreme court within 5 days of the
determination and shall be decided within 21 days after filing. Determinations shall be made
public 30 days or more before the Colorado secretary of state certifies the ballot.

(b) Non-compliance with voter instruction is demonstrated by any of the following actions with
respect to the application or ratification by state legislators, and in the case of members of
Congress referring the Congressional Term Limits Amendment for ratification, if the legislator:

(i) fails to vote in favor when brought to a vote;

(ii) fails to second if it lacks one;

(iii) fails to vote in favor of all votes bringing the measure before any committee in which he or
she serves;

(iv) fails to propose or otherwise bring to a vote of the full legislative body, if necessary;

(v) fails to vote against any attempt to delay, table or otherwise prevent a vote by the full
legislative body or committee;

(vi) fails in any way to ensure that all votes are recorded and made available to the public;

(vii) fails to vote against any change, addition or modification; or

(viii) fails to vote against any amendment with longer limits than the Congressional Term Limits
Amendment.

(6) ENFORCEMENT.

Any legal challenge to this section 12 shall be an original action filed with the Colorado supreme
court. All terms of this section 12 are severable.

[Enacted by the people November 5, 1996 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
December 26, 1996.]

Note: The Colorado Supreme Court has declared Section 12 unconstitutional. Morrissey v. State,
951 P.2d 911 (Colo. 1998).

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 276 013.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 1997 ***

Section 13. Prohibited methods of taking wildlife

(1) It shall be unlawful to take wildlife with any leghold trap, any instant kill body-gripping
design
trap, or by poison or snare in the state of Colorado.

(2) The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall not prohibit:

(a) The taking of wildlife by use of the devices or methods described in subsection (1) of this
section by federal, state, county, or municipal departments of health for the purpose of protecting
human health or safety;

(b) The use of the devices or methods described in subsection (1) of this section for controlling:

(I) wild or domestic rodents, except for beaver or muskrat, as otherwise authorized by law; or

(II) wild or domestic birds as otherwise authorized by law;

(c) The use of non-lethal snares, traps specifically designed not to kill, or nets to take wildlife for
scientific research projects, for falconry, for relocation, or for medical treatment pursuant to
regulations established by the Colorado wildlife commission; or

(d) The use of traps, poisons or nets by the Colorado division of wildlife to take or manage fish
or
other non-mammalian aquatic wildlife.

(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section 13, the owner or lessee of private property
primarily used for commercial livestock or crop production, or the employees of such owner or
lessee, shall not be prohibited from using the devices or methods described in subsection (1) of
this section on such private property so long as:

(a) such use does not exceed one thirty day period per year; and

(b) the owner or lessee can present on-site evidence to the division of wildlife that ongoing
damage to livestock or crops has not been alleviated by the use of non-lethal or lethal control
methods which are not prohibited.

(4) The provisions of this section 13 shall not apply to the taking of wildlife with firearms,
fishing
equipment, archery equipment, or other implements in hand as authorized by law.

(5) The general assembly shall enact, amend, or repeal such laws as are necessary to implement
the provisions of this section 13, including penalty provisions, no later than May 1, 1997.

(6) As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a) The term "taking" shall be defined as provided in section 33-1-102 (43), C.R.S., on the date
this section is enacted.

(b) The term "wildlife" shall be defined as provided in section 33-1-102 (51), C.R.S., on the date
this section is enacted.

Enacted by the people November 5, 1996 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January
15, 1997.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 277 012.A 018.0 0 CO 1876 1998 ***

Section 12a. Congressional Term Limits Declaration

(1) Information for voters about candidates' decisions to term limit themselves is more important
than party labeling, therefore, any candidate seeking to be elected to the United States Congress
shall be allowed, but not required, to submit to the secretary of state an executed copy of the
Term
Limits Declaration set forth in subsection (2) of this section not later than 15 days prior to the
certification of every congressional election ballot to each county clerk and recorder by the
secretary of state. The secretary of state shall not refuse to place a candidate on any ballot due to
the candidate's decision not to submit such declaration.

(2) The language of the Term Limits Declaration shall be as set forth herein and the secretary of
state shall incorporate the applicable language in square brackets " " for the office the candidate
seeks:

Congressional Term Limits Declaration

Term Limits Declaration One

Part A: I, ---------------, voluntarily declare that, if elected, I will not serve in the United States
House of Representatives more than 3 terms Senate more than 2 terms after the effective date of
the Congressional Term Limits Declaration Act of 1998.

--------------------------------  -------------------------------

Signature by candidate executes Part A  Date

Part B: I, ---------------, authorize and request that the secretary of state place the applicable ballot
designation, "Signed declaration to limit service to no more than 3 terms 2 terms " next to my
name on every election ballot and in all government-sponsored voter education material in which
my name appears as a candidate for the office to which Term Limit Declaration One refers.

--------------------------------  -------------------------------

Signature by candidate executes Part B  Date

If the candidate chooses not to execute any or all parts of Term Limits Declaration One, then he
or
she may execute and submit to the secretary of state any or all parts of Term Limits Declaration
Two.

Term Limits Declaration TwoPart A: I, ---------------, have voluntarily chosen not to sign Term
Limits Declaration One. If I had signed that declaration, I would have voluntarily agreed to limit
my service in the United States House of Representatives to no more than 3 terms Senate to no
more than 2 terms after the passage of the congressional Term Limits Declaration Amendment of
1998.

--------------------------------  -------------------------------

Signature by candidate executes Part A  Date

After executing Part A, a candidate may execute and submit the voluntary statement in Part B.

Part B: I, ---------------, authorize and request that the secretary of state place the ballot
designation, "Chose not to sign declaration to limit service to 3 terms 2 terms " next to my name
on every official election ballot and in all government-sponsored voter education material in
which my name appears as a candidate for the office to which Term Limits Declaration Two
refers.

--------------------------------  -------------------------------

Signature by candidate executes Part B  Date

(3) In the ballot designations in this section, the secretary of state shall incorporate the applicable
language in brackets for the office the candidate seeks. Terms shall be calculated without regard
to
whether the terms were served consecutively.

(4) The secretary of state shall allow any candidate who at any time has submitted an executed
copy of Term Limits Declaration One or Two, to timely submit an executed copy of Term Limits
Declaration One or Two at which time all provisions affecting that Term Limits Declaration shall
apply.

(5) The secretary of state shall place on that part of the official election ballot and in all
government-sponsored voter education material, immediately following the name of each
candidate who has executed and submitted Parts A and B of Term Limits Declaration One, the
words, "Signed declaration to limit service to 3 terms 2 terms " unless the candidate has qualified
as a candidate for a term that would exceed the number of terms set forth in Term Limits
Declaration One. The secretary of state shall place on that part of the official election ballot and
in
all government-sponsored voter education material, immediately following the name of each
candidate who has executed and submitted Parts A and B of Term Limits Declaration Two the
words, "Chose not to sign declaration to limit service to 3 terms 2 terms ".

(6) For the purpose of this section, service in office for more than one-half of a term shall be
deemed as service for a full term.

(7) No candidate shall have more than one declaration and ballot designation in effect for any
office at the same time and a candidate may only execute and submit Part B of a declaration if
Part A of that declaration is or has been executed and submitted.

(8) The secretary of state shall provide candidates with all the declarations in this section and
promulgate regulations as provided by law to facilitate implementation of this section as long as
the regulations do not alter the intent of this section.

(9) If any portion of this section be adjudicated invalid, the remaining portion shall be severed
from the invalid portion to the greatest possible extent and be given the fullest force and
application.

[Enacted by the people November 3, 1998 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor, Dec.
30, 1998.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 278 010.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1999 ***

Section 10. City and county of Broomfield - created

The city of Broomfield is a preexisting municipal corporation and home rule city of the state of
Colorado, physically situated in parts of Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld counties. On and
after November 15, 2001, all territory in the municipal boundaries of the city of Broomfield shall
be detached from the counties of Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld and shall be consolidated
into a single county and municipal corporation with the name "The City and County of
Broomfield". Prior to November 15, 2001, the city of Broomfield shall not extend its boundaries
beyond the annexation boundary map approved by the Broomfield city council on April 28, 1998,
as an amendment to the city of Broomfield 1995 master plan. The existing charter of the said city
of Broomfield shall become the charter of the city and county of Broomfield.

The city and county of Broomfield shall have perpetual succession; shall own, possess, and hold
all real and personal property, including water rights, the right to use water, and contracts for
water, currently owned, possessed, or held by the said city of Broomfield; shall assume, manage,
and dispose of all trusts in any way connected therewith; shall succeed to all the rights and
liabilities of, shall acquire all benefits of, and shall assume and pay all bonds, obligations, and
indebtedness of said city of Broomfield and its proportionate share of the general obligation
indebtedness and, as provided by intergovernmental agreement, its proportionate share of
revenue
bond obligations of the counties of Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld on and after November
15, 2001.

The city and county of Broomfield may sue and defend, plead, and be impleaded in all courts and
in all matters and proceedings; may have and use a common seal and alter the same at pleasure;
may grant franchises; may purchase, receive, hold, and enjoy, or sell and dispose of real and
personal property; may receive bequests, gifts, and donations of real and personal property, or
real
and personal property in trust for public, charitable, or other purposes, and do all things and acts
necessary to carry out the purposes of such gifts, bequests, donations, and trusts with power to
manage, sell, lease, or otherwise dispose of the same in accordance with the terms of the gift,
bequest, donation, or trust.

The city and county of Broomfield shall have the power within and without its territorial limits to
construct, condemn, purchase, acquire, lease, add to, maintain, conduct, and operate water works,
water supplies, sanitary sewer facilities, storm water facilities, parks, recreation facilities, open
space lands, light plants, power plants, heating plants, electric and other energy facilities and
systems, gas facilities and systems, transportation systems, cable television systems,
telecommunication systems, and other public utilities or works or ways local in use and extent, in
whole or in part, and everything required therefor, for the use of said city and county and the
inhabitants thereof; to purchase in whole or in part any such systems, plants, works, facilities, or
ways, or any contracts in relation or connection thereto that may exist, and may enforce such
purchase by proceedings at law as in taking land for public use by right of eminent domain; and
to
issue bonds in accordance with its charter in any amount necessary to carry out any said powers
or
purposes, as the charter may provide and limit. The city and county of Broomfield shall have all
of
the powers of its charter and shall have all of the powers set out in section 6 of this article,
including the power to make, amend, add to, or replace its charter as set forth in section 9 of this
article. The charter provisions and procedures shall supersede any constitutional or statutory
limitations and procedures regarding financial obligations. The city and county of Broomfield
shall have all powers conferred to home rule municipalities and to home rule counties by the
constitution and general laws of the state of Colorado that are not inconsistent with the
constitutional provisions creating the city and county of Broomfield.

Prior to November 15, 2001, the charter and ordinances of the city of Broomfield shall govern all
local and municipal matters of the city. On and after November 15, 2001, the constitutional
provisions creating and governing the city and county of Broomfield, the city and county charter
adopted in accordance with these constitutional provisions, and the ordinances existing and
adopted from time to time shall govern all local and municipal matters of the city and county of
Broomfield.

On and after November 15, 2001, the requirements of section 3 of article XIV of this constitution
and the general annexation and consolidation statutes of the state relating to counties shall apply
to the city and county of Broomfield. On and after November 15, 2001, any contiguous territory,
together with all property belonging thereto, hereafter annexed to or consolidated with the city
and
county of Broomfield under any laws of this state, in whatsoever county the same may be at the
time, shall be detached from such other county and become a municipal and territorial part of the
city and county of Broomfield.

On and after November 15, 2001, no annexation or consolidation proceeding shall be initiated
pursuant to the general annexation and consolidation statutes of the state to annex lands to or
consolidate lands with the city and county of Broomfield until such proposed annexation or
consolidation is first approved by a majority vote of a seven-member boundary control
commission. The boundary control commission shall be composed of one commissioner from
each of the boards of commissioners of Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld counties,
respectively, and three elected officials of the city and county of Broomfield. The commissioners
from each of the said counties shall be appointed by resolution of the respective county boards of
commissioners. The three elected officials from the city and county of Broomfield shall be
appointed by the mayor of the city and county of Broomfield. The boundary control commission
shall adopt all actions, including actions regarding procedural rules, by majority vote. Each
member of the boundary control commission shall have one vote, including the commissioner
who acts as chairperson of the commission. The commission shall file all procedural rules
adopted
by the commission with the secretary of state.

[Enacted by the people November 3, 1998 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January --, 1999.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 279 011.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1999 ***

Section 11. Officers - city and county of Broomfield

The officers of the city and county of Broomfield shall be as provided for by its charter or
ordinances. The jurisdiction, term of office, and duties of such officers shall commence on
November 15, 2001. The qualifications and duties of all such officers shall be as provided for by
the city and county charter and ordinances, but the ordinances shall designate the officers who
shall perform the acts and duties required of county officers pursuant to this constitution or the
general laws of the state of Colorado, as far as applicable. All compensation for elected officials
shall be determined by ordinance and not by state statute. If any elected officer of the city and
county of Broomfield shall receive any compensation, such officer shall receive the same as a
stated salary, the amount of which shall be fixed by ordinance within limits fixed by the city and
county charter or by resolution approving the city and county budget and paid in equal monthly
payments. No elected officer shall receive any increase or decrease in compensation under any
ordinance or resolution passed during the term for which such officer was elected.
[Enacted by the people November 3, 1998 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January --, 1999. ]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 280 012.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1999 ***

Section 12. Transfer of government

Upon the canvass of the vote showing the adoption of the constitutional provisions creating and
governing the city and county of Broomfield, the governor shall issue a proclamation
accordingly,
and, on and after November 15, 2001, the city of Broomfield and those parts of the counties of
Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld included in the boundaries of said city shall be
consolidated
into the city and county of Broomfield. The duties and terms of office of all officers of Adams,
Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld counties shall no longer be applicable to and shall terminate with
regard to the city and county of Broomfield. On and after November 15, 2001, the terms of office
of the mayor and city council of the city of Broomfield shall terminate with regard to the city of
Broomfield and said mayor and city council shall become the mayor and city council of the city
and county of Broomfield. The city council of the city and county of Broomfield, in addition to
performing the duties prescribed in the city and county charter and ordinances, shall perform the
duties of a board of county commissioners or may delegate certain duties to various boards and
commissions appointed by the city council of the city and county of Broomfield. The city and
county of Broomfield shall be a successor district of the city of Broomfield under section 20 of
article X of this constitution. Any voter approval granted the city of Broomfield under section 20
of article X of this constitution prior to November 15, 2001, shall be considered voter approval
under said section for the city and county of Broomfield. The city and county of Broomfield shall
have the power to continue to impose and collect sales, use, and property taxes that were
imposed
by the city of Broomfield and the counties of Adams, Boulder, Jefferson, and Weld within the
areas where said taxes were imposed on November 14, 2001, until the voters of the city and
county of Broomfield approve uniform sales, use, and property taxes within the city and county
of
Broomfield or approve increased sales, use, or property taxes within the city and county of
Broomfield. Any violation of any criminal statutes of the state of Colorado occurring on or
before
November 14, 2001, shall continue to be prosecuted within the county where the violation
originally occurred.

[Enacted by the people November 3, 1998 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January --, 1999.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 281 013.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 1999 ***

Section 13. Sections self-executing -  appropriations

Sections 10 through 13 of this article shall be in all respects self-executing and shall be construed
so as to supersede any conflicting constitutional or statutory provision that would otherwise
impede the creation of the city and county of Broomfield or limit any of the provisions of those
sections. Except as otherwise provided in sections 10 through 13, said sections shall be effective
on and after November 15, 2001. After the adoption of the constitutional provisions creating and
governing the city and county of Broomfield, the general assembly may appropriate funds, if
necessary, in cooperation with the city and county of Broomfield to implement these
constitutional provisions at the state level.

[Enacted by the people November 3, 1998 -- Effective upon proclamation of the Governor,
January --, 1999.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 282 004.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 4.  Qualifications of members. No person shall be a representative or senator who shall
not have attained the age of twenty five years, who shall not be a citizen of the United States and 
who shall not for at least twelve months next preceding his election, have resided within the
territory included in the limits of the district in which he shall be chosen.

[As amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 283 025.0 005.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 25.  Special legislation prohibited. The general assembly shall not pass local or special
laws in any of the following enumerated cases, that is to say; for granting divorces; laying out,
opening, altering or working roads or highways; vacating roads, town plats, streets, alleys and
public grounds; locating or changing county seats; regulating county or township affairs;
regulating the practice in courts of justice; regulating the jurisdiction and duties of police
magistrates, changing the rules of evidence in any trial or inquiry; providing for changes of venue
in civil or criminal cases; declaring any person of age; for limitation of civil actions or giving
effect to informal or invalid deeds; summoning or impaneling grand or petit juries; providing for
the management of common schools; regulating the rate of interest on money; the opening or
conducting of any election, or designating the place of voting; the sale or mortgage of real estate
belonging to minors or others under disability; the protection of game or fish; chartering or
licensing ferries or toll bridges; remitting fines, penalties or forfeitures; creating, increasing or
decreasing fees, percentage or allowances of public officers; changing the law of descent;
granting
to any corporation, association or individual the right to lay down railroad tracks; granting to any
corporation, association or individual any special or exclusive privilege, immunity or franchise
whatever. In all other cases, where a general law can be made applicable no special law shall be
enacted. 

[As amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 284 003.0 010.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 3.  Uniform taxation   exemptions. (1) (a)  Each property tax levy shall be uniform upon
all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article located within the
territorial limits of the authority levying the tax. The actual value of all real and personal property
not exempt from taxation under this article shall be determined under general laws, which shall
prescribe such methods and regulations as shall secure just and equalized valuations for
assessments of all real and personal property not exempt from taxation under this article.
Valuations for assessment shall be based on appraisals by assessing officers to determine the
actual value of property in accordance with provisions of law, which laws shall provide that
actual
value be determined by appropriate consideration of cost approach, market approach, and income
approach to appraisal. However, the actual value of residential real property shall be determined
solely by consideration of cost approach and market approach to appraisal; and, however, the
actual value of agricultural lands, as defined by law, shall be determined solely by consideration
of the earning or productive capacity of such lands capitalized at a rate as prescribed by law. 

(b)  Residential real property, which shall include all residential dwelling units and the land, as
defined by law, on which such units are located, and mobile home parks, but shall not include
hotels and motels, shall be valued for assessment at twenty one percent of its actual value. For
the
property tax year commencing January 1, 1985, the general assembly shall determine the
percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to residential
real property. For each subsequent year, the general assembly shall again determine the
percentage
of the aggregate statewide valuation for assessment which is attributable to each class of taxable
property, after adding in the increased valuation for assessment attributable to new construction
and to increased volume of mineral and oil and gas production. For each year in which there is a
change in the level of value used in determining actual value, the general assembly shall adjust
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property which is set forth in this paragraph
(b) as is necessary to insure that the percentage of the aggregate statewide valuation for
assessment which is attributable to residential real property shall remain the same as it was in the
year immediately preceding the year in which such change occurs. Such adjusted ratio shall be
the
ratio of valuation for assessment for residential real property for those years for which such new
level of value is used. All other taxable property shall be valued for assessment at twenty nine
percent of its actual value. However, the valuation for assessment for producing mines, as
defined
by law, and lands or leaseholds producing oil or gas, as defined by law, shall be a portion of the
actual annual or actual average annual production therefrom, based upon the value of the
unprocessed material, according to procedures prescribed by law for different types of minerals.
Non producing unpatented mining claims, which are possessory interests in real property by
virtue
of leases from the United States of America, shall be exempt from property taxation. 

(c)  The following classes of personal property, as defined by law, shall be exempt from property
taxation: Household furnishings and personal effects which are not used for the production of
income at any time; inventories of merchandise and materials and supplies which are held for
consumption by a business or are held primarily for sale; livestock; agricultural and livestock
products; and agricultural equipment which is used on the farm or ranch in the production of
agricultural products. 

(d)  Ditches, canals, and flumes owned and used by individuals or corporations for irrigating land
owned by such individuals or corporations, or the individual members thereof, shall not be
separately taxed so long as they shall be owned and used exclusively for such purposes. 

(2) (a)  During each property tax year beginning with the property tax year which commences
January 1, 1983, the general assembly shall cause a valuation for assessment study to be
conducted. Such study shall determine whether or not the assessor of each county has complied
with the property tax provisions of this constitution and of the statutes in valuing property and
has
determined the actual value and valuation for assessment of each and every class of taxable real
and personal property consistent with such provisions. Such study shall sample at least one
percent of each and every class of taxable real and personal property in the county. 

(b) (I)  If the study conducted during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1983,
shows that a county assessor did not comply with the property tax provisions of this constitution
or the statutes or did not determine the actual value or the valuation for assessment of any class
or
classes of taxable real and personal property consistent with such provisions, the state board of
equalization shall, during such year, order such county assessor to reappraise during the property
tax year which commences January 1, 1984, such class or classes for such year. Such reappraisal
shall be performed at the expense of the county. 

(II)  If the study performed during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1984,
shows
that the county assessor failed to reappraise such class or classes as ordered or failed in his
reappraisal to meet the objections of the state board of equalization, the state board of
equalization
shall cause a reappraisal of such class or classes to be performed in the property tax year which
commences January 1, 1985. The cost of such reappraisal shall be paid by the state by an
appropriation authorized by law. However, if such reappraisal shows that the county assessor did
not value or assess taxable property as prescribed by the provisions of this constitution or of the
statutes, upon certification to the board of county commissioners by the state board of
equalization
of the cost thereof, the board of county commissioners shall pay to the state the cost of such
reappraisal. 

(III)  The reappraisal performed in the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, shall
become the county's abstract for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for
such year. The state board of equalization shall order the county's board of county commissioners
to levy, and the board of county commissioners shall levy, in 1985 an additional property tax on
all taxable property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county
commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess payment made by the state to school districts
within the county during the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985. 

(c) (I)  Beginning with the property tax year which commences January 1, 1985, and applicable
to
each property tax year thereafter, the annual study conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
subsection (2) shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in paragraph (a) of this subsection
(2), set forth the aggregate valuation for assessment of each county for the year in which the
study
is conducted. 

(II)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study,
during the next following year, the state board of equalization shall cause to be performed, at the
expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which the study
shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this constitution or the
statutes. The state board of equalization shall cause to be performed during the next following
year, at the expense of the county, a reappraisal of any class or classes of taxable property which
the study shows were not appraised consistent with the property tax provisions of this
constitution
or the statutes even though the county's aggregate valuation for assessment as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment was not more than five percent below the county's aggregate
valuation for assessment as determined by the study. The reappraisal shall become the county's
valuation for assessment with regard to such reappraised class or classes for the year in which the
reappraisal was performed. 

(III)  In any case in which a reappraisal is ordered, state equalization payments to school districts
within the county during the year in which the reappraisal is performed shall be based upon the
valuation for assessment as reflected in the county's abstract for assessment. The state board of
equalization shall also order the board of county commissioners of the county to impose, and the
board of county commissioners shall impose, at the time of imposition of property taxes during
such year an additional property tax on all taxable property within the county in an amount
sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners shall repay, the state for any excess
payments made by the state to school districts within the county during the year in which such
reappraisal was performed plus interest thereon at a rate and for such time as are prescribed by
law. 

(IV)  If the valuation for assessment of a county as reflected in its abstract for assessment is more
than five percent below the valuation for assessment for such county as determined by the study
and if the state board of equalization fails to order a reappraisal, state equalization payments to
school districts within the county during the year following the year in which the study was
conducted shall be based upon the valuation for assessment for the county as reflected in the
county's abstract for assessment. The board of county commissioners of such county shall impose
in the year in which such school payments are made an additional property tax on all taxable
property in the county in an amount sufficient to repay, and the board of county commissioners
shall repay, the state for the difference between the amount the state actually paid in state
equalization payments during such year and what the state would have paid during such year had
such state payments been based on the valuation for assessment as determined by the study.

[As amended November 6, 1956.; as amended November 2, 1982    Effective upon proclamation
of the Governor, December 30, 1982.; as amended November 8, 1988    Effective upon
proclamation of the Governor, January 1, 1989.; as amended December 28, 2000.]
*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 285 003.5 010.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 3.5. Homestead exemption for qualifying senior citizens  (1) For property tax years
commencing on or after January 1, 2002, fifty percent of the first two hundred thousand dollars
of
actual value of residential real property, as defined by law, that, as of the assessment date, is
owner-occupied and is used as the primary residence of the owner-occupier shall be exempt from
the property taxation if:

          (a) The owner-occupier is sixty-five years of age or older as of the assessment date and has
     owned and occupied such residential real property as his or her primary residence for the
     ten years immediately preceding the assessment date;

          (b) The owner-occupier is the spouse or surviving spouse of an owner-occupier who
     previously qualified for a property tax exemption for the same real residential property
     under paragraph (a) of subsection (1).

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, section 20 of this article, or
any other constitutional provision, for any property tax year commencing on or after January 1,
2003, the general assembly may raise or lower by law the maximum amount of actual value of
residential real property of which fifty percent shall be exempt under subsection (1) of this
section.

(3) For any property tax year commencing on or after January 1, 2002, the general assembly shall
compensate each local governmental entity that receives property tax revenues for the net amount
of property tax revenues lost as a result of property tax exemption provided for in this section. 
For purposes of section 20 of article X of this constitution, such compensation shall not be
included in local government fiscal year spending and approval of this section by the voters
statewide shall constitute a voter-approved revenue change to allow the maximum amount of
state
fiscal year spending for the 2001-02 state fiscal year to be increased by forty-four million one
hundred twenty-three thousand six hundred four dollars and to include said amount in state fiscal
year spending for said fiscal year for the purpose of calculating subsequent state fiscal year
spending limits.  Payments made from the state general fund to compensate local governmental
entities for property tax revenues lost as a result of the property tax exemption provided for in
this
section shall not be subject to any statutory limitation on general fund appropriations because the
enactment of this section by the people of Colorado constitutes voter approval of a weakening of
any such limitation.

[Adopted December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 286 006.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 6.  County commissioners   election   term. In each county having a population of less
than seventy thousand there shall be elected, for a term of four years each, three county
commissioners who shall hold sessions for the transaction of county business as provided by law;
any two of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Two of said
commissioners shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and four, and
at the general election every four years thereafter; and the other one of said commissioners shall
be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and six, and at the general election
every four years thereafter; provided, that when the population of any county shall equal or
exceed
seventy thousand, the board of county commissioners may consist of five members, any three of
whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Three of said commissioners in
said county shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and four, and at
the general election every four years thereafter; and the other two of said commissioners in such
county shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen hundred and six and every four
years thereafter; and all of such commissioners shall be elected for the term of four years. 

[As amended November 4, 1902.; as amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 287 008.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 8.  County officers   election   term   salary. There shall be elected in each county, at the
same time at which members of the general assembly are elected, commencing in the year
nineteen hundred and fifty four, and every four years thereafter, one county clerk, who shall be ex
officio recorder of deeds and clerk of the board of county commissioners; one sheriff; one
coroner; one treasurer who shall be collector of taxes; one county surveyor; one county assessor;
and one county attorney who may be elected or appointed, as shall be provided by law; and such
officers shall be paid such salary or compensation, either from the fees, perquisites and
emoluments of their respective offices, or from the general county fund, as may be provided by
law. The term of office of all such officials shall be four years, and they shall take office on the
second Tuesday in January next following their election, or at such other time as may be
provided
by law.

[As amended November 4, 1902; November 2, 1954; December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 288 015.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 15.  Compensation and fees of county officers. The general assembly shall fix the
compensation of county officers in this state by law, and shall establish scales of fees to be
charged and collected by such county officers. All such fees shall be paid into the county general
fund. 

When fixing the compensation of county officers, the general assembly shall give due
consideration to county variations, including population; the number of persons residing in
unincorporated areas; assessed valuation; motor vehicle registrations; building permits; military
installations; and such other factors as may be necessary to prepare compensation schedules that
reflect variations in the workloads and responsibilities of county officers and in the tax resources
of the several counties. 

The compensation of any county officer shall be increased or decreased only when the
compensation of all county officers within the same county, or when the compensation for the
same county officer within the several counties of the state, is increased or decreased. 

County officers shall not have their compensation increased or decreased during the terms of
office to which they have been elected or appointed.

[As amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 289 017.0 014.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 17.  Service Authorities
     (1)  (a) The general assembly shall provide by statute for the organization, structure,
functions,
     services, facilities, and powers of service authorities pursuant to the following
     requirements:
          (b) A service authority may be formed only upon the approval of a majority of the
     registered electors voting thereon in the territory to be included.
          (c) The territory within a service authority may include all or part of one county or home
     rule county or all or part of two or more adjoining counties or home rule counties, but shall
     not include only a part of any city or county, home rule city or town, or statutory city or
     town at the time of formation of the service authority.  No more than one service authority
     shall be established in any territory, and, in no event, shall a service authority be formed in
     the metropolitan area composed of the city and county of Denver, and Adams, Arapahoe,
     and Jefferson counties which does not include all of the city and county of Denver and all
     or portions of Adams, Arapahoe, and Jefferson counties.
     (d) The boundaries of any service area shall not be such as to create any enclave.
     (e) No territory shall be included within the boundaries of more than one service authority.
(2)  (a) The general assembly shall also provide by statute for:
     (b) The inclusion and exclusion of territory in or from a service authority.
     (c) The dissolution of a service authority.
          (d) The merger of all or part of two or more adjacent service authorities, except that such
     merger shall require the approval of a majority of the registered electors voting thereon in
     each of the affected service authorities; and,
          (e) The boundaries of any service authority or any special taxing districts therein or the
     method by which such boundaries are to be determined or changed; and
     (f) The method for payment of any election expenses.
     (3)  (a) The general assembly shall designate by statute the functions, services, and facilities
     which may be provided by a service authority, and the manner in which the members of
     the governing body of any service authority shall be elected from compact districts of
     approximately equal population by the registered electors of the authority, including the
     terms and qualifications of such members.  The general assembly may provide that
     members of the governing body may be elected by a vote of each compact district or by an
     at-large vote or combination thereof.  Notwithstanding any provision in this constitution or
     the charter of any home rule city and county, city, town, or county to the contrary, mayors,
     councilmen, trustees, and county commissioners may additionally hold elective office with
     a service authority and serve therein either with or without compensation, as provided by
     statute.
          (b) A service authority shall provide any function, service, or facility designated by statute
     and authorized as provided in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this subsection.
          (c) All propositions to provide functions, services, or facilities shall be submitted, either
     individually or jointly, to the registered electors in the manner and form prescribed by law.
          (d) Each such function, service, or facility shall be authorized if approved by a majority of
     the registered electors of the authority voting thereon; but if the service authority includes
     territory in more than one county, approval shall also require a majority of the registered
     electors of the authority voting thereon in those included portions of each of the affected
     countries.
          (e) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this subsection, where,
     upon formation of a service authority, any function, service, or facility is already being
     provided in at least four counties or proportions thereof by a single special district,
     regional planning commission or metropolitan council, or an association of political
     subdivisions, the general assembly may provide, without a vote of the registered electors,
     for assumption by one or more service authorities of such function, service, or facility.
          (f) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this subsection, a
     service authority may contract with any other political subdivision to provide or receive
     any function, service, or facility designated by statute; but a service authority shall not be
     invested with any taxing power as a consequence of such contract.
     (4)  (a) A service authority shall be a body corporate and a political subdivision of the state.
          (b) Any other provision of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, any service
     authority formed under this article and the statutes pursuant thereto may exercise such
     powers to accomplish the purposes and to provide the authorized functions, services, and
     facilities of such authority as the general assembly may provide by statute.
          (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of article XX of this constitution, any authorized
     function, service, or facility may be provided exclusively by the authority or concurrently
     with other jurisdictions as may be prescribed by statute, subject to the provisions of
     subsections (3)(c), (3)(d), (3)(e), and (3)(f) of this section.

[Adopted January 1, 1972; Amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 290 001.0 015.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 1. 

[Section repealed effective December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 291 007.0 015.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 7.

[Section repealed effective December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 292 014.0 018.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 14.  Medical use of marijuana for persons suffering from debilitating medical conditions  

(1) As used in this section, these terms are defined as follows:
     (a) "Debilitating medical condition" means:
                    (I) Cancer, glaucoma, positive status for human immunodeficiency virus, or
          acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or treatment for such conditions;
                    (II) A chronic or debilitating disease or medical condition, or treatment for such
          conditions, which produces, for a specific patient, one or more of the following,
          and for which, in the professional opinion of the patient's physician, such
          condition or conditions reasonably may be alleviated by the medical use of
          marijuana: cachexia; severe pain; severe nausea; seizures, including those that are
          characteristic of epilepsy; or persistent muscle spasms, including those that are
          characteristic of multiple sclerosis; or
                    (III) Any other medical condition, or treatment for such condition, approved by the
          state health agency, pursuant to its rule making authority or its approval of any
          petition submitted by a patient or physician as provided in this section.
          (b) "Medical use" means the acquisition, possession, production, use, or transportation of
     marijuana or paraphernalia related to the administration of such marijuana to address the
     symptoms or effects of a patient's debilitating medical condition, which may be authorized
     only after a diagnosis of the patient's debilitating medical condition by a physician or
     physicians, as provided by this section.
          (c) "Parent" means a custodial mother or father of a patient under the age of eighteen
     years, any person having custody of a patient under the age of eighteen years, or any
     person serving as legal guardian for a patient under the age of eighteen years.
     (d) "Patient" means a person who has a debilitating medical condition.
          (e) "Physician" means a doctor of medicine who maintains, in good standing, a license to
     practice medicine issued by the state of Colorado.
          (f) "Primary care-giver" means a person, other than the patient and the patient's physician,
     who is eighteen years of age or older and has significant responsibility for managing the
     well-being of a patient who has a debilitating medical condition.
          (g) "Registry identification card" means that document, issued by the state health agency,
     which identifies a patient authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and such
     patient's primary care-giver, if any has been designated.
          (h) "State health agency" means that public health related entity of state government
     designated by the governor to establish and maintain a confidential registry of patients
     authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and enact rules to administer this
     program.
          (i) "Usable form of marijuana" means the seed, leaves, buds, and flowers of the plant
     (genus) cannabis, and any mixture or preparation thereof, which are appropriate for
     medical use as provided in this section, but excludes the plant's stalks, stems, and roots.
          (j) "Written documentation" means a statement signed by a patient's physician or copies of
     the patient's pertinent medical records.
     (2)  (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (5), (6) and (8) of this section, a patient or
     primary care-giver charged with a violation of the state's criminal laws related to the
     patient's medical use of marijuana will be deemed to have established an affirmative
     defense to such allegation where:
                    (I) The patient was previously diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating
          medical condition;
                    (II) The patient was advised by his or her physician, in the context of a bona fide
          physician-patient relationship, that the patient might benefit from the medical use
          of marijuana in connection with a debilitating medical condition; and
                    (III) The patient and his or her primary care-giver were collectively in possession
          of the amounts of marijuana only as permitted in this section.
          This affirmative defense shall not exclude the assertion of any other defense where a
     patient or primary care-giver is charged with a violation of state law related to the patient's
     medical use of marijuana.
          (b) Effective June 1, 1999, it shall be an exception from the state's criminal laws for any
     patient or primary care-giver in lawful possession of a registry identification card to
     engage in the medical use of marijuana, except as otherwise provided in subsections (5)
     and (8) of this section.
     (c) It shall be an exception from the state's criminal laws for any physician to:
                    (I) Advise a patient whom the physician has diagnosed as having a debilitating
          medical condition, about the risks and benefits of medical marijuana, provided that
          such advice is based upon the physician's contemporaneous assessment of the
          patient's medical history and current medical condition and a bona fide physician-
          patient relationship; or
                    (II) Provide a patient with written documentation, based upon that physician's
          contemporaneous assessment of the patient's medical history and current medical
          condition and a bona fide physician-patient relationship, stating that the patient has
          a debilitating medical condition and might benefit from the medical use of
          marijuana.
          No physician shall be denied any rights or privileges for the acts authorized for this
     subsection.
          (d) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no person, including a patient or primary
     care-giver, shall be entitled to the protection of this section for his or her acquisition,
     possession, manufacture, production, use, sale, distribution, dispensing, or transportation
     of marijuana for any use other than medical use.
          (e) Any property interest that is possessed, owned, or used in connection with the medical
     use of marijuana or acts incidental to such use, shall not be harmed, neglected, injured or
     destroyed while in the possession of state or local law enforcement officials where such
     property has been seized in connection with the claimed medical use of marijuana.  Any
     such property interest shall not be forfeited under any provision of state law providing for
     the forfeiture of property other than as a sentence imposed after conviction of a criminal
     offense or entry of a plea of guilty to such offense.  Marijuana and paraphernalia seized by
     state or local law enforcement officials from a patient of primary care-giver in connection
     with the claimed medical use of marijuana shall be returned immediately upon the
     determination of the district attorney or his designee that the patient or primary care-giver
     is entitled to the protection contained in this section as may be evidenced, for example, by
     a decision not to prosecute, the dismissal of charges, or acquittal.
(3) The state health agency shall create and maintain a confidential registry of patients who have
applied for and who are entitled to receive a registry identification card according to the criteria
set forth in this subsection, effective June 1, 1999.
          (a) No person shall be permitted to gain access to any information about patients in the
     state health agency's confidential registry, or any information otherwise maintained by the
     state health agency about physicians and primary care-givers, except for authorized
     employees of the state health agency in the course of their official duties and authorized
     employees of the state or local law enforcement agencies which have stopped or arrested a
     person who claims to be engaged in the medical use of marijuana and in possession of a
     registry identification card or its functional equivalent, pursuant to paragraph (e) of this
     subsection (3).  Authorized employees of the state or local law enforcement agencies shall
     be granted access to the information contained within the state health agency's
     confidential registry only for the purpose of verifying that an individual who has presented
     a registry identification card to a state or local law enforcement official is lawfully in
     possession of such card.
          (b) In order to be placed on the state's confidential registry for the medical use of
     marijuana, a patient must reside in the state of Colorado and submit the completed
     application form adopted by the state health agency, including the following information,
     to the state health agency:
                    (I) The original or a copy of written documentation stating that the patient has been
          diagnosed with a debilitating medical condition and the physician's conclusion that
          the patient might benefit from the medical use of marijuana;
          (II) The name, address, date of birth, and social security number of the patient;
                    (III) The name, address, and telephone number of the patient's primary care
          physician; and
                    (IV) The name and address of the patient's primary care-giver, if one is designated
          at the time of application.
          (c) Within thirty days of receiving the information referred to in subparagraphs (3)(b)(I)-
     (IV), the state health agency shall verify medical information contained in the patient's
     written documentation.  The agency shall notify the applicant that his or her application for
     a registry card has been denied if the agency's review of such documentation discloses
     that: the information required pursuant to paragraph (3)(b) of this section has not been
     provided or has been falsified; the documentation fails to state that the patient has a
     debilitating medical condition specified in the section or by state health agency rule; or the
     physician does not have a license to practice medicine issued by the state of Colorado. 
     Otherwise not more than five days after verifying such information, the state agency shall
     issue one serially number registration card to the patient, stating:
          (I) The patient's name, address, date of birth, and social security number;
                    (II) That the patient's name has been certified to the state health agency as a person
          who has a debilitating medical condition, whereby the patient may address such
          condition with the medical use of marijuana;
                    (III) The date of issuance of the registry identification card and the date of
          expiration of such card, which shall be one year from the date of issuance; and
                    (IV) The name and address of the patient's primary care-giver, if any is designated
          at the time of application.
          (d) Except for patients applying pursuant to subsection (6) of this section, where the state
     health agency, within thirty-five days of receipt of an application, fails to issue a registry
     identification card or fails to issue a verbal or written notice of the denial of such
     application, the patient's application for such card will be deemed to have been approved. 
     Receipt shall be deemed to have occurred upon delivery to the state health agency, or
     deposit in the United States mails.  Notwithstanding the forgoing, no application shall be
     deemed received prior to June 1, 1999.  A patient who is questioned by any state or local
     law enforcement official about his or her medical use of marijuana shall provide a copy of
     the application submitted to the state health agency, including the written documentation
     and proof of the date of mailing or other transmission of the written documentation for
     delivery to the state health agency, which shall be accorded the same legal effect as a
     registry identification card, until such time as the patient receives notice that the
     application has been denied.
          (e) A patient whose application has been denied by the state health agency may not reapply
     during the six months following the date of the denial and may not use an application for a
     registry identification card as provided in paragraph (3)(d) of this section.  The denial of a
     registry identification card shall be considered a final agency action.  Only the patient
     whose application has been denied shall have standing to contest the agency action.
          (f) When there has been a change in the name, address, physician, or primary care-giver of
     a patient who has qualified for a registry identification card, that patient must notify the
     state health agency of any such change within ten days.  A patient who has not designated
     a primary care-giver at the time of application to the state health agency may do so in
     writing at any time during the effective period of the registry identification card, and the
     primary care-giver may act in the capacity after such designation.  To maintain an effective
     registry identification card, a patient must annually resubmit, at least thirty days prior to
     the expiration date stated on the registry identification card, updated written
     documentation to the state health agency, as well as the name and address of the patient's
     primary care-giver, if any is designated at such time.
          (g) Authorized employees of state or local law enforcement agencies shall immediately
     notify the state health agency when any person in possession of a registry identification
     card has been determined by a court of law to have willfully violated the provisions of this
     section or its implementing legislation, or has pled guilty to such offense.
          (h) A patient who no longer has a debilitating medical condition shall return his or her
     registry identification card to the state health agency within twenty-four hours of receiving
     such diagnosis by his or her physician.
          (i) The state health agency may determine and levy reasonable fees to pay for any direct or
     indirect administrative costs associated with its role in this program.
     (4)  (a) A patient my engage in the medical use of marijuana, with no more marijuana than is
     medically necessary to address a debilitating medical condition.  A patient's medical use
     of marijuana, within the following limits, is lawful:
          (I) No more than two ounces of a usable form of marijuana; and
                    (II) No more than six marijuana plants, with three or fewer being mature, flowering
          plants that are producing a usable form of marijuana.
          (b) For quantities of marijuana in excess of these amounts, a patient or his or her primary
     care-giver may raise as an affirmative defense to charges of violation of state law and such
     greater amounts were medically necessary to address the patient's debilitating medical
     condition.
     (5)  (a) No patient shall:
                    (I) Engage in the medical use of marijuana in a way that endangers the health or 
          well-being of any person; or
                    (II) Engage in the medical use of marijuana in plain view of, or in a place open to,
          the general public.
          (b) In addition to any other penalties provided by law, the state health agency shall revoke
     for a period of one year the registry identity card of any patient found to have willfully
     violated the provisions of this section or the implementing legislation adopted by the
     general assembly.
(6) Notwithstanding paragraphs (2)(a) and (3)(d) of this section, no patient under eighteen years
of
age shall engage in the medical use of marijuana unless:
          (a) Two physicians have diagnosed the patient as having a debilitating medical condition;
          (b) One of the physicians referred to in paragraph (6)(a) has explained the possible risks
     and benefits of medical use of marijuana to the patient and each of the patient's parents
     residing in the state of Colorado;
          (c) The physicians referred to in paragraph (6)(b) has provided the patient with written
     documentation, specified in subparagraph (3)(b)(I);
          (d) Each of the patient's parents residing in Colorado consent in writing to the state health
     agency to permit the patient to engage in the medical use of marijuana;
          (e) A parent residing in Colorado consents in writing to serve as a patient's primary care-
     giver;
          (f) A parent serving as a primary care-giver completes and submits an application for a
     registry identification card as provided in subparagraph (3)(b) of this section and the
     written consents referred to in paragraph 6(d) to the state health agency;
          (g) The state health agency approves the patient's application and transmits the patient's
     registry identification card to the parent designated as a primary care-giver.
          (h) The patient and primary care-giver collectively possess amounts of marijuana no
     greater than those specified in subparagraph (4)(a)(I) and (II); and
          (i) The primary care-giver controls the acquisition of such marijuana and the dosage and
     frequency of its use by the patient.
(7) Not later than March 1, 1999, the governor shall designate by executive order, the state health
agency as defined in paragraph (1)(g) of this section.
(8) Not later than April 30, 1999, the General Assembly shall define such terms and enact such
legislation as may be necessary for the implementation of this section, as well as determine and
enact criminal penalties for:
          (a) Fraudulent representation of a medical condition by a patient to a physician, state
     health agency, or state or local law enforcement official for the purpose of falsely
     obtaining a registry identification card or avoiding arrest and prosecution;
          (b) Fraudulent use or theft of any person's registry identification card to acquire, possess,
     produce, use, sell, distribute or transport marijuana, including but not limited to cards that
     are required to be returned where patients are no longer diagnosed as having a debilitating
     medical condition;
          (c) Fraudulent production or counterfeiting of, or tampering with, one or more registry
     identification cards; or
          (d) Breach of confidentiality of information provided to or by the state health agency.
(9) Not later than June 1, 1999, the state health agency shall develop and make available to the
residents of Colorado an application form for persons seeking to be listed on the confidential
registry of patients.  By such date, the state health agency shall also enact rules of administration,
including but not limited to rules governing the establishment and confidentiality of the registry,
the verification of medical information, the issuance and form of registry identification cards,
communications with law enforcement officials about registry identification cards that have been
suspended where a patient is no longer diagnosed as having a debilitating medical condition, and
the manner in which the agency may consider adding debilitating medical conditions to the list
provided in the section.  Beginning June 1, 1999, the state health agency shall accept physician or
patient initiated petitions to add such debilitating medical conditions to the list provided in this
section and, after such hearing as the state health agency deems appropriate, shall approve or
deny
such petitions within one hundred eighty days of submission.  The decision to approve or deny a
petition shall be considered a final agency action.
     (10) (a) No governmental, private, or any other health insurance provider shall be required to
be
     liable for any claim for reimbursement for the medical use of marijuana.
          (b) Nothing in this section shall require any employer to accommodate the medical use of
     marijuana in any work place.
(11) Unless otherwise provided by this section, shall become effective upon official declaration
of
the vote hereon by proclamation of the governor, pursuant to article V, section (1)(4), and shall
apply acts or offenses committed on or after that date.

[Adopted December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 293 002.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 2.  Officers. The officers of the city and county of Denver shall be such as by
appointment
or election may be provided for by the charter; and the jurisdiction, term of office, duties and
qualifications of all such officers shall be such as in the charter may be provided; but the charter
shall designate the officers who shall, respectively, perform the acts and duties required of county
officers to be done by the constitution or by the general law, as far as applicable. If any officer of
said city and county of Denver shall receive any compensation whatever, he or she shall receive
the same as a stated salary, the amount of which shall be fixed by the charter, or, in the case of
officers not in the classified civil service, by ordinance within limits fixed by the charter;
provided, however, no elected officer shall receive any increase or decrease in compensation
under any ordinance passed during the term for which he was elected.

[As amended November 7, 1950; as amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 293 004.0 020.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 4.  First charter. (1) The people of the city and county of Denver are hereby vested with
and they shall always have the exclusive power in the making, altering, revising or amending
their
charter.

(2)  Deleted by S.C.R.00-005, Section 1, effective December 28, 2000. 

(3)  Deleted by S.C.R.00-005, Section 1, effective December 28, 2000. 

(4)  Any franchise relating to any street, alley, or public place of the said city and county shall be
subject to the initiative and referendum powers reserved to the people under section 1 of article V
of this constitution. Such referendum power shall be guaranteed notwithstanding a recital in an
ordinance granting such franchise that such ordinance is necessary for the immediate
preservation
of the public peace, health, and safety. Not more than five percent of the registered electors of a
home rule city shall be required to order such referendum. Nothing in this section shall preclude
a
home rule charter provision which requires a lesser number of registered electors to order such
referendum or which requires a franchise to be voted on by the registered electors. If such a
referendum is ordered to be submitted to the registered electors, the grantee of such franchise
shall
deposit with the treasurer the expense (to be determined by said treasurer) of such submission.
The council shall have power to fix the rate of taxation on property each year for city and county
purposes.

[Added November 4, 1902.; as amended November 6, 1984    Effective upon proclamation of the
Governor, January 14, 1985.; as amended November 4, 1986    Effective upon proclamation of
the Governor, December 17, 1986.; as amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 294 001.0 022.0 0 CO 1876 2000 ***

Section 1.  Repeal of intoxicating liquor laws.  The manufacture, sale and distribution of all
intoxicating liquors, wholly within the state of Colorado, shall, subject to the constitution and
laws of the United States, be performed exclusively by or through such agencies and under such
regulations as may hereafter be provided by statutory laws of the state of Colorado; but no such
laws shall ever authorize the establishment or maintenance of any saloon. 

[As amended November 8, 1932.; as amended December 28, 2000.]

*** MEND ***

*** CEND ***