New Jersey Constitution, Amendments, 1947-Present
     
*** MSTART 001 008.0 004.0 2 NJ 1947 1953 ***

Article IV, Section 8, paragraph 2

2.  No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and adopted by a majority of
the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;

A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies and first-aid or rescue squads to
conduct, under such restriction and control as shall from time to time be prescribed by the
Legislature by law, games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of rights to participate, and
the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance sometimes known as bingo or
lotto, played with cards bearing numbers or other designations, five or more in one line, the
holder covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the
game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers
on such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to
educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in any municipality, in which a
majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as the submission
thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize the conduct of such games
of chance therein, and

B. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies
and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling or
rights to participate, and the awarding of prizes in the specific kind of games of chance
sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by
chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious, or public-spirited uses in any municipality, in which such law shall
be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as
the submission thereof shall be prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to
restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance.

Amended Nov. 3, 1953

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 002 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1953 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3

3.  Any citizen and resident of this State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstance from active service, in time of war or of other emergency as, from time
to time, defined by the Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall
be exempt form taxation on real and personal property to an aggregate assessed valuation not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), which exemption shall not be altered or repealed.  Any
person hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by the United States Veterans
Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability, shall be entitled to such
further exemption from taxation as from time to time may be provided by law.  The widow of
any citizen and resident of this State who has met or shall meet his death on active duty in time
of war or of other emergency as defined in any such service shall be entitled, during her
widowhood, and while a resident of this State, to the exemption in this paragraph provided for
honorably discharged veterans and to such further exemption as from time to time may be
provided by law.  The widow of any citizen and resident of this State who has had or shall
hereafter have active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any branch of
the Armed Forces of the United States and who died while on active duty in any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States, or who has been or may hereafter be honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service in time of war or other emergency as
so defined in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled, during her
widowhood and while a resident of this State, to the exemption in this paragraph provided for
honorably discharged veterans and to such further exemptions as from time to time may be
provided by law.

Amended Nov. 3, 1953.

*** MEND ***
***MSTART 003 003.0 002.0 0 NJ 1945 1957 ***

Article II, Section 3

3.  Every citizen of the United States, of the age of 21 years, who shall have been a resident of
the State 6 months, and of the county in which he claims his vote 60days, next before election,
shall be entitled to vote for all officers that are now or hereafter may be elective by the people
and upon all questions which may be submitted to a vote of the people.

Amended Nov. 5, 1957.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 004 004.0 008.0 2 NJ 1945 1958 ***

Article VIII, Section 4, paragraph 2

2.  The fund for the support of free public schools, and all money, stock and other property,
which may hereafter be appropriated for that purpose, or received into the treasury under the
provision of any law heretofore passed to augment the said fund, shall be securely invested, and
remain a perpetual fund; and the income thereof, except so much as it may be judged expedient
to apply to an increase of the capital, shall be annually appropriated to the support of free public
schools, and for the equal benefit of all the people of the State; and it shall not be competent
except as hereinafter provided, for the Legislature to borrow, appropriate or use the said fund or
any part thereof for any other purpose, under any pretense whatever.  The bonds of any school
district of this State, issued according to law, shall be proper and secure investments for the said
fund and, in addition, said fund, including he income therefrom and any other moneys duly
appropriated to the support of free public schools may be used in such manner as the legislature
may provide by law to secure the payment of the principle of or interest on bonds or notes issued
for school purposes by counties, municipalities or school districts or for the payment or purchase
of any such bonds or notes or any claims for interest thereon.

Adopted Nov. 4, 1958.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 005 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1960 ***

Article VII, Section 1, adding new paragraph number 4

4.  The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting exemption from taxation on the
real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the age of 65 or more years residing in a
dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of such real property but no such
exemption shall be in excess of $800.00 in the assessed valuation of such property and such
exemption shall be restricted to owners having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year. 
Any such exemption when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will no be in addition to
any other exemption to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled.

New.  Adopted November 8, 1960.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 006 006.0 004.0 4 NJ 1945 1961 ***

Article IV, Section 6, adding new paragraph number 4

4.  The Legislature, in order to insure continuity of State, county and local governmental
operations in periods of emergency resulting from disasters caused by enemy attack, shall have
the power and the immediate and continuing duty by legislation (1) to provide, prior to the
occurrence of the emergency, for prompt and temporary succession to the powers and duties of
public offices, of whatever nature and whether filled by election or appointment, the incumbents
of which may become unavailable for carrying on the powers and duties of such offices, and (2)
to adopt such other measures as may be necessary and proper for insuring the continuity of
governmental operations.  In the exercise of the powers hereby conferred, the Legislature shall in
all respects conform to the requirements of this Constitution except to the extent that in the
judgment of the Legislature to do so would be impractical or would admit of undue delay.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 007 003.0 002.0 0 NJ 1945 1963 ***

Article II, Section 3

3. (A) Every citizen of the United States , of the age of 21 years, who shall have been a resident
of this State 6 months and of the county in which he claims his vote 40 days, next before the
election, shall be entitled to vote for all officers that now are or hereafter may be elective by the
people, and upon all question which may be submitted to a vote of the people; and
(b) Every citizen of the United States, of the age of 21 years, who shall have been a resident of
the State and of the county in which he claims his vote 40 days, next before the election and who
shall not be eligible to vote elsewhere, shall be entitled to qualify and to vote for electors for
President and Vice President of the United States only, in such manner as the Legislature shall
provide; and 
(c) Any person registered as a voter in any election district of this State who has removed or shall
remove to another State or to another county within this State and is not able there to qualify to
vote by reason of an insufficient period of residence in such State or county, shall, as a citizen of
the United States, have the right to vote for electors for President and Vice President of the
United States, only, by Presidential Elector Absentee Ballot, in the county from which he has
removed, in such a manner as the Legislature shall provide.

Amended Dec. 5, 1963

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 008 001.0 008.0 1 NJ 1945 1963 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 1

1. (a) Property shall be assessed for taxation under general laws and by uniform rules.  All real
property assessed and taxed locally or by the State for allotment and payment to taxing districts
shall be assessed according to the same standard of value, except as otherwise permitted herein,
and such real property shall be taxed at the general tax rate of the taxing district in which the
property is situated, for the use of such taxing district.
(b) The Legislature shall enact laws to provide that the value of land, not less than 5 acres in area,
which is determined by the assessing officer of the taxing jurisdiction to be actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use and to have been so devoted for at least the 2 successive years
immediately preceding the tax year in issue, shall, for local tax purposes, on application of the
owner, be that value which such land has for agricultural or horticultural use.
Any such laws shall provide that when land which has been valued in this manner for
local tax purposes is applied to a use other than for agriculture or horticulture it shall be subject
to additional taxes in amount equal to the difference, if any, between the taxes paid or payable on
the basis of the valuation and the assessment authorized hereunder and the taxes that would have
been paid or payable had the land been valued and assessed as otherwise provided in the
Constitution, in the current year and in such of the tax years immediately preceding, not in excess
of 2 such years in which the land was valued as herein authorized. 
Such laws shall also provide for the equalization of assessments of land valued in
accordance with the provisions hereof and for the assessment and collection of any additional
taxes levied thereupon and shall include such other provisions as shall be necessary to carry out
the provision of this amendment.  

Adopted 11/5/63

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 009 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1963 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3

3.  Any citizen and resident of the State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released from
active service, in time of war or of other emergency as, from time to time, defined by the
Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled, annually, to
a deduction from the amount of any tax bill for taxes on real and personal property, or both, in
the sum of $50.00 or if the amount of any such tax bill shall be less than $50.00, to a cancellation
thereof, which deduction or cancellation shall not be altered or repealed.  Any person
hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by the United States Veterans
Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability, shall be entitled to such
further deduction from taxation as from time to time may be provided by law.  The widow of any
citizen and resident of this State who has met or shall meet his death on active duty in time of
war or of other emergency as so defined in any such service shall be entitled, during her
widowhood, and while a resident of this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this paragraph
provided for honorably discharged veterans and to such further deduction as from time to time
may be provided by law.  The widow of any citizen and resident of this State who has had or
shall hereafter have active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any
branch of the Armed Forces of the United States and who died or shall die while on active duty
in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled, during her widowhood
and while a resident of this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for
honorably discharged veterans and to such further deductions as from time to time may be
provided by law.

Amended 11/5/63

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 010 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1963 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

4. The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of the State of the
age of 65 or more years residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of
such real property but no such deduction shall be in excess of $80.00 and such deduction shall be
restricted to owners having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year.  Any such deduction
when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition to any other deduction
or exemption to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled.

Amended 11/5/63, Effective 12/5/63

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 011 001.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article 4, Section 1, Paragraph 2   
 
      2. No person shall be a member of the Senate who shall not have attained the age of thirty
years, and have been a citizen and resident of the State for four years, and of the district for
which he sha1l te elected one year, next before his election. No person shall be a member of the
General Assembly who shall not have attained the age of twenty-one years and have been a
citizen and resident of the State for two years, and of the district for which he shall he elected one
year next before his election. No person shall be eligible for membership in the Legislature
unless he be entitled to the right of suffrage. 

Adopted general election Nov. 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 012 004.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***         

Article IV, Section 4, paragraph 2

2. If the Apportionment Commission fails so to certify such establishment and apportionment to
the Secretary of State on or before the date fixed or if prior thereto it determines that it will be
unable to do so, it shall so certify to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey and he
shall appoint an eleventh member of the Commission. The Commission so constituted, by a
majority of the whole number of its members, shall, within one month after the appointment of
such eleventh member, certify to the Secretary of State the establishment of Senate and Assembly
districts and the apportionment of senators and members of the General Assembly. 

Amended general election Nov. 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 013 001.0 005.0 14 NJ 1968 ***

Article V, Section 1, paragraph 14

14. (a) Every bill which shall have passed both houses shall be presented to the Governor. If he
approves he shall sign it, hut if not he shall return it, with his objections, to the house in which it
shall have originated, which shall enter the objections at large on its journal and proceed to
reconsider it. If upon reconsideration, on or after the third lay following the return of the bill, 2/3
of all the members of the house of origin shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with
the objections of the Governor, to the other house, by which it shall be reconsidered and if
approved by 2/3 of all the members of that house, it shall become a law; and in all such cases the
votes of each house shall he determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting
for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively. If a bill shall
not be returned by the Governor within10 days, Sundays excepted, after it shall have been
presented to him, the same shall become a law on the tenth day, unless the house of origin shall
on that day be in adjournment. If on the tenth day the house of origin shall be in temporary
adjournment in the course of a regular or special session, the bill shall become a law on the day
on which the house of origin shall reconvene, unless the Governor shall on that day return the bill
to that house.
           (b)  If on the tenth day the Legislature is in adjournment sine die, the bill shall become a
law if the Governor shall sign it within 45 days, Sundays excepted, after such adjournment. On
the said forty-fifth day the bill shall become a law, notwithstanding the failure of the Governor to
sign it within the period last stated, unless at or before noon he shall return it with his objections
to the house of origin:
           (1)  on said forty-fifth day, if the house shall have again convened in regular or special
session of the same 2-year Legislature and shall be meeting on said day, or
           (2)  on the day upon which the house shall reconvene, if it is in temporary adjournment in
the course of a regular or special session of the same 2-year Legislature on said forty-fifth day, or
           (3)  on said forty-fifth day, if the House is in adjournment sine die on said day, at a special
session of the Legislature which ball convene on that day, without petition or call, for the sole
purpose of acting pursuant to this paragraph upon bills returned by the Governor. At such specia1
session a bill may be reconsidered on or after the first day following return of the bill, in the
manner provided in this paragraph for the reconsideration of bills, and if approved upon
reconsideration by 2/3 of all the members of each house, it shall become a law. The Governor, in
returning with his objections a bill for reconsideration at any general or special session of tie
Legislature, may recommend that an amendment or amendments specified by him be made in the
bill, and in such case the Legislature may amend and re-enact the bill. If a bill be so amended and
re-enacted, it shall he presented again to the Governor, but shall become a law only if he shall
sign it within 10 days after presentation; and no bill shall be returned by the Governor a second
time. A special session of the Legislature shall not be convened pursuant to this paragraph
whenever the forty-fifth day, Sundays excepted, after adjournment sine die of a regular or special
session shall fall on or after the last day of the legislative year in which the second annual session
was held, in which event any bill not signed by the Governor within such 45-day period shall not
become a law. 

Amended general election Nov. 5, 1968.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 014 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1969 ***

Article IV, Section 7, paragraph 2

No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;
          A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies and first-aid or rescue squads to
conduct, under such restrictions and control as shall from time to time be prescribed by the
Legislature by law, games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of rights to participate, and
the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance sometimes known as bingo or
lotto, played with cards bearing numbers other designations, 5 or more in one line, the holder
covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game
being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on
such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to
educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public spirited uses, in any municipality, in which a
majority of the qualified voters voting thereon, at a general or special election as the submission
thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize the conduct of such games
of chance therein.
          B. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies
and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of
rights to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of games of chance
sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by
chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in any municipality, in which such law shall
be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as
the submission thereof shall he prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to
restrict and control, by law the conduct of such games of chance, and
          C. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries restricted
to the selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by drawings when the
entire net proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions, State aid for education.
         
Amended Nov. 4, 1969.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 015 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1970 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

The Legislature may, from time to tine enact laws granting an annual deduction from the amount
of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the age of
65 or more years residing  In a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of such
real property but no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00 and such deduction shall be
restricted to owners having an income exclusive of social security benefits not in excess of
$5,000.00 per year.  Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will
not be in addition to any other deduction or exemption to which the said citizen and resident may
be entitled.  The State shall annually reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to 2 of
the tax loss to the district resulting from the allowance of tax deductions pursuant to this
paragraph.

Amended Nov. 3, 1970

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 016 002.0 001.0 0 NJ 1945 1993 ***

Article I, Section 2

a. All political power is inherent in the people. Government is instituted for the protection,
security, and benefit of the people, and they have the right at all times to alter or reform the same,
whenever the public good may require it.
b. The people reserve unto themselves the power to recall, after at least one year of service, any
elected official in this State or representing this State in the United States Congress. The
Legislature shall enact laws to provide for such recall elections. Any such laws shall include a
provision that a recall election shall be held upon petition of at least 25% of the registered voters
in the electoral district of the official sought to be recalled. If legislation to implement this
constitutional amendment is not enacted within one year of the adoption of the amendment, the
Secretary of State shall, by regulation, implement the constitutional amendment, except that
regulations adopted by the Secretary of State shall be superseded by any subsequent legislation
consistent with this constitutional amendment governing recall elections. The sufficiency of any
statement of reasons or grounds procedurally required shall be a political rather than a judicial
question.

         Amended Nov. 2, 1993.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 017 009.0 001.0 0 NJ 1945 1973 ***

Article I, Section 9

9. The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate; but the Legislature may authorize the trial of
civil causes by a jury of six persons. The Legislature may provide that in any civil cause a verdict
may be rendered by not less than five-sixths of the jury. The legislature may authorize the trial of
the issue of mental incompetency without a jury.
   
      Amended November 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 018 012.0 001.0 0 NJ 1945 1992 ***

Article I, Section 12


12.  Excessive bail shall not be required, excessive fines shall not be imposed, and cruel and
unusual punishments shall not be inflicted. It shall not be cruel and unusual punishment to
impose the death penalty on a person convicted of purposely or knowingly causing death or
purposely or knowingly causing serious bodily injury resulting in death who committed the
homicidal act by his own conduct or who as an accomplice procured the commission of the
offense by payment or promise of payment of anything of pecuniary value.
         
Amended November 3, 1992.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 019 022.0 001.0 0 NJ 1945 1991 ***

Article I, Section 22     
    
22.  A victim of a crime shall be treated with fairness, compassion and respect by the criminal
justice system. A victim of a crime shall not be denied the right to be present at public judicial
proceedings except when, prior to completing testimony as a witness, the victim is properly
sequestered in accordance with law or the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New
Jersey. A victim of a crime shall be entitled to those rights and remedies as may be provided by
the Legislature. For the purposes of this paragraph, Avictim of a crime@ means: a) a person who
has suffered physical or psychological injury or has incurred loss of or damage to personal or real
property as a result of a crime or an incident involving another person operating a motor vehicle
while under the influence of drugs or alcohol, and b) the spouse, parent, legal guardian,
grandparent, child or sibling of the decedent in the case of a criminal homicide.
       
Amended November 5, 1991.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 020 001.0 002.0 1 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 1  

1. General elections shall be held annually on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November; but the time of holding such elections may be altered by law. The Governor and
members of the Legislature shall be chosen at general elections. Local elective officers shall be
chosen at general elections or at such other times as shall be provided by law.
         
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 021 001.0 002.0 2 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 2

2. All questions submitted to the people of the entire State shall be voted upon at the general
election next occurring at least 70 days following the final action of the Governor or the
Legislature, as appropriate, necessary to submit the questions. The text of any such question shall
be published at least once in one or more newspapers of each county, if any newspapers be
published therein, at least 60 days before the election at which it is to be submitted to the people,
and the results of the vote upon a question shall be void unless the text thereof shall have been so
published.

Amended Nov. 7, 1995,

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 022 001.0 002.0 3 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 3

3. (a) Every citizen of the United States, of the age of 18 years, who shall have been a resident of
this State and of the county in which he claims his vote 30 days, next before the election, shall be
entitled to vote for all officers that now are or hereafter may be elective by the people, and upon
all questions which may be submitted to a vote of the people; and
          
(b) (Deleted by amendment, effective December 5, 1974.)
         
(c) Any person registered as a voter in any election district of this State who has removed or shall
remove to another state or to another county within this State and is not able there to qualify to
vote by reason of an insufficient period of residence in such state or county, shall, as a citizen of
the United States, have the right to vote for electors for President and Vice President of the
United States, only, by Presidential Elector Absentee Ballot, in the county from which he has
removed, in such manner as the Legislature shall provide.
 
Amended Nov. 7, 1995
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 023 001.0 002.0 4 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 4

4. In time of war no elector in the military service of the State or in the armed forces of the
United States shall be deprived of his vote by reason of absence from his election district. The
Legislature may provide for absentee voting by members of the armed forces of the United States
in time of peace. The Legislature may provide the manner in which and the time and place at
which such absent electors may vote, and for the return and canvass of their votes in the election
district in which they respectively reside.
     
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 024 001.0 002.0 5 NJ 1945 1995 ***
 
Article II, Section 1, paragraph 5

5. No person in the military, naval or marine service of the United States shall be considered a
resident of this State by being stationed in any garrison, barrack, or military or naval place or
station within this State.
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 025 001.0 002.0 6 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 6.

6. No idiot or insane person shall enjoy the right of suffrage.
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 026 001.0 002.0 7 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 1, paragraph 7

7. The Legislature may pass laws to deprive persons of the right of suffrage who shall be
convicted of such crimes as it may designate.  Any person so deprived, when pardoned or
otherwise restored by law to the right of suffrage, shall again enjoy that right.
         
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 027 002.0 002.0 1 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 2, paragraph 1

1. (a) After each federal census taken in a year ending in zero, the Congressional districts shall be
established by the New Jersey Redistricting Commission.  The commission shall consist of 13
members, none of whom shall be a member or employee of the Congress of the United States.
The members of the commission shall be appointed with due consideration to geographic, ethnic
and racial diversity and in the manner provided herein.
          
(b) There shall first be appointed 12 members as follows:
  (1) two members to be appointed by the President of the Senate;
  (2) two members to be appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly;
  (3) two members to be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate;
  (4) two members to be appointed by the minority leader of the General Assembly; and
       (5) four members, two to be appointed by the chairman of the State committee of the political
     party whose candidate for the office of Governor received the largest number of votes at
     the most recent gubernatorial election and two to be appointed by the chairman of the
     State committee of the political party whose candidate for the office of Governor received
     the next largest number of votes in that election.
Appointments to the commission under this subparagraph shall be made on or before June 15 of
each year ending in one and shall he certified by the respective appointing officials to the
Secretary of State on or before July 1 of that year.
Each partisan delegation so appointed shall appoint one of its members as its chairman who shall
have authority to make such certifications and to perform such other tasks as the members of that
delegation shall reasonably require.
         
(c) There shall then be appointed one member, to serve as an independent member, who shall
have been for the preceding five years a resident of this State, but who shall not during that
period
have held public or party office in this State.
         
The independent member shall be appointed upon the vote of at least seven of the previously
appointed members of the commission on or before July 15 of each year ending in one, and those
members shall certify that appointment to the Secretary of State on or before July 20 of that year.
If the previously appointed members are unable to appoint an independent member within the
time allowed therefor, they shall so certify to the Supreme Court not later than that July 20 and
shall include in that certification the names of the two persons who, in the members= final vote
upon the appointment of the independent member, received the greatest number of votes. Not
later than August 10 following receipt of that certification, the Supreme Court shall by majority
vote of its full authorized membership select, of the two persons so named, the one more
qualified by education and occupational experience, by prior public service in government or
otherwise, and by demonstrated ability to represent the best interest of the people of this State, to
be the independent member.
The Court shall certify that selection to the Secretary of State not later than the following August
15.
         
(d) Vacancies in the membership of the commission occurring prior to the certification by the
commission of Congressional districts or during any period in which the districts established by
the commission may be or are under challenge in court shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointments were made within five days of their occurrence. In the case of a vacancy in
the membership of the independent member, if the other members of the commission are unable
to fill that vacancy within that five-day period, they shall transmit certification of such inability
within three days of the expiration of the period to the Supreme Court, which shall select the
person to fill the vacancy within five days of receipt of that certification.
         
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 028 002.0 002.0 2 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 2, paragraph 2

2. The independent member shall serve as the chairman of the commission. The commission
shall meet to organize as soon as may be practicable after certification of the appointment of the
independent member, but not later than the Wednesday after the first Monday in September of
each year ending in one. At the organizational meeting the members of the commission shall
determine such organizational matters as they deem appropriate. Thereafter, a meeting of the
commission may be called by the chairman or upon the request of seven members, and seven
members of the commission shall constitute a quorum at any meeting thereof for the purpose of
taking any action.

Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 029 002.0 002.0 3 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 2, paragraph 3

3. On or before the third Tuesday of each year ending in two, or within three months after receipt
in each decade by the appropriate State officer of the official statement by the Clerk of the United
States House of Representatives, issued pursuant to federal law, regarding the number of
members of the House of Representatives apportioned to this State for that decade, whichever is
later, the commission shall certify the establishment of the Congressional districts to the
Secretary of State. The commission shall certify the establishment of districts pursuant to a
majority vote of the full authorized membership of the commission convened in open public
meeting, of which meeting there shall be at least 24 hours= public notice. Any vote by the
commission upon a proposal to certify the establishment of a Congressional district plan shall be
taken by roll call and shall be recorded, and the vote of any member in favor of any
Congressional district plan shall nullify any vote which that member shall previously have cast
during the life of the commission in favor of a different Congressional district plan. If the
commission is unable to certify the establishment of districts by the time required due to the
inability of a plan to achieve seven votes, the two district plans receiving the greatest number of
votes, but not fewer than five votes, shall be submitted to the Supreme Court, which shall select
and certify whichever of the two plans so submitted conforms most closely to the requirements of
the Constitution and laws of the United States.

Amended Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 030 002.0 002.0 4 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 2, paragraph 4

4. The New Jersey Redistricting Commission shall hold at least three public hearings in different
parts of the State. The commission shall, subject to the constraints of time and convenience,
review written plans for the establishment of Congressional districts submitted by members of
the public.
       
Adopted Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 031 002.0 002.0 5 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article II, Section 2, paragraph 5

5. Meetings of the New Jersey Redistricting Commission shall be held at convenient times and
locations and, with the exception of the public hearings required by paragraph 4 of this section 1
and the meeting at which the establishment of districts is certified as prescribed by paragraph 3 of
this section,2 may be closed to the public.
         
Amended Nov. 7.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 032 002.0 002.0 6 NJ 1945 1995 ***
         
Article II, Section 2, paragraph 6

6. The Legislature shall appropriate the funds necessary for the efficient operation of the New
Jersey Redistricting Commission.
      
Amended Nov. 7, 1995.
         
*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 033 001.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 1, paragraph 2

2. No person shall be a member of the Senate who shall not have attained the age of thirty years,
and have been a citizen and resident of the State for four years, and of the district for which he
shall be elected one year, next before his election. No person shall be a member of the General
Assembly who shall not have attained the age of twenty-one years and have been a citizen and
resident of the State for two years, and of the district for which he shall be elected one year, next
before his election.  No person shall be eligible for membership in the Legislature unless he be
entitled to the right of suffrage.
         
Amended Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 034 001.0 004.0 3 NJ 1945 1968 ***

Article IV, Section 1, paragraph 3

3. Each Legislature shall be constituted for a term of 2 years beginning at noon on the second
Tuesday in January in each even numbered year, at which time the Senate and General Assembly
shall meet and organize separately and the first annual session of the Legislature shall commence.
Said first annual session shall terminate at noon on the second Tuesday in January next
following, at which time the second annual session shall commence and it shall terminate at noon
on the second Tuesday in January then next following but either session may be sooner
terminated by adjournment sine die. All business before either House or any of the committees
thereof at the end of the first annual session may be resumed in the second annual session.  The
legislative year shall commence at noon on the second Tuesday in January of each year.
        
 Amended Nov. 5, 1968.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 035 002.0 004.0 1 NJ 1945 1966 ***
         
Article IV, Section 2, paragraph 1

1. The Senate shall be composed of forty senators apportioned among Senate districts as nearly
as may be according to the number of their inhabitants as reported in the last preceding decennial
census of the United States and according to the method of equal proportions. Each Senate
district shall be composed, wherever practicable, of one single county, and, if not so practicable,
of two or more contiguous whole counties.
         
Amended Nov. 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 036 002.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 2, paragraph 2 

 2. Each senator shall be elected by the legally qualified voters of the Senate district, except that
if the Senate district is composed of two or more counties and two senators are apportioned to the
district, one senator shall be elected by the legally qualified voters of each Assembly district.
Each senator shall be elected for a term beginning at noon of the second Tuesday in January next
following his election and ending at noon of the second Tuesday in January four years thereafter,
except that each senator, to be elected for a term beginning in January of the second year
following the year in which a decennial census of the United States is taken, shall be elected for a
term of two years.
         
Amended Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 037 002.0 004.0 3 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 2, paragraph 3

3. The General Assembly shall be composed of eighty members. Each Senate district to which
only one senator is apportioned shall constitute an Assembly district. Each of the remaining
Senate districts shall be divided into Assembly districts equal in number to the number of
senators apportioned to the Senate district. The Assembly districts shall be composed of
contiguous territory, as nearly compact and equal in the number of their inhabitants as possible,
and in no event shall each such district contain less than eighty per cent nor more than one
hundred twenty per cent of one-fortieth of the total number of inhabitants of the State as reported
in the last preceding decennial census of the United States. Unless necessary to meet the
foregoing requirements, no county or municipality shall be divided among Assembly districts
unless it shall contain more than one-fortieth of the total number of inhabitants of the state, and
no county or municipality shall be divided among a number of Assembly districts larger than one
plus the whole number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants in the county or
municipality by one-fortieth of the total number of inhabitants of the State.
         
New.  Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 038 002.0 004.0 4 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 2, paragraph 4   
      
4. Two members of the General Assembly shall be elected by the legally qualified voters of each
Assembly district for terms beginning at noon of the second Tuesday in January next following
their election and ending at noon of the second Tuesday in January two years thereafter.
         
Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***



*** MSTART 039 003.0 004.0 1 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 3, paragraph 1

1. After the next and every subsequent decennial census of the United States, the Senate districts
and Assembly districts shall be established, and the senators and members of the General
Assembly shall be apportioned among them, by an Apportionment Commission consisting of ten
members, five to be appointed by the chairman of the State committee of each of the two
political parties whose candidates for governor receive the largest number of votes at the most
recent gubernatorial election. Each State chairman, in making such appointments, shall give due
consideration to the representation of the various geographical areas of the State. Appointments
to the Commission shall be made on or before November 15 of the year in which such census is
taken and shall be certified by the Secretary of State on or before December 1 of that year. The
Commission, by a majority of the whole number of its members, shall certify the establishment
of Senate and Assembly districts and the apportionment of senators and members of the general
Assembly to the Secretary of State within one month of the receipt by the Governor of the
official decennial census of the United States for New Jersey, or on or before February 1 of the
year following the year in which the census is taken, whichever date is later.
         
New.  Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 040 003.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 3, paragraph 2

2. If the Apportionment Commission fails so to certify such establishment and apportionment to
the Secretary of State on or before the date fixed or if prior thereto it determines that it will be
unable so to do, it shall so certify to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey and he
shall appoint an eleventh member of the Commission. The Commission so constituted, by a
majority of the whole number of its members, shall, within one month after the appointment of
such eleventh member, certify to the Secretary of State the establishment of Senate and Assembly
districts and the apportionment of senators and members of the General Assembly.

New. Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 041 003.0 004.0 3 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article IV, Section 3, paragraph 3

3. Such establishment and apportionment shall be used thereafter for the election of members of
the Legislature and shall remain unaltered until the following decennial census of the United
States for New Jersey shall have been received by the Governor.
      
Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 042 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1969 ***

Article IV, Section 7, paragraph 2

2. No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;
         
A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies and first-aid or rescue squads to
conduct, under such restrictions and control as shall from time to time be prescribed by the
Legislature by law, games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of rights to participate, and
the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance some times known as bingo or
lotto, played with cards bearing numbers or other designations, 5 or more in one line, the holder
covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game
being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on
such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to
educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public spirited uses, in any municipality, in which a
majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as the submission
thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize the conduct of such games
of chance therein.
         
B. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies
and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of and restricted to, the selling of rights
to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of games of chance sometimes
known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by chance,
when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in any municipality, in which such law shall
be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as
the submission thereof shall be prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to
restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance, and
         
C. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries restricted to the
selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by drawings when the entire net
proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions, State aid for education.

New.  Amended Nov. 4, 1969.

*** MEND ***



*** MSTART 043 001.0 005.0 14 NJ 1945 1968 *** 

Article V, Section 1, paragraph 14

14.     (a) Every bill which shall have passed both houses shall be presented to the Governor. If he
approves he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his objections, to the house in which it
shall have originated, which shall enter the objections at large on its journal and proceed to
reconsider it. If upon reconsideration, on or after the third day following the return of the bill,
two-thirds of all the members of the house of origin shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent,
together with the objections of the Governor, to the other house, by which it shall be
reconsidered and if approved by two-thirds of all the members of that house, it shall become a
law; and in all such cases the votes of each house shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the
names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house
respectively. If a bill shall not be returned by the Governor within 10 days, Sundays excepted,
after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall become a law on the tenth day, unless the
house of origin shall on that day be in adjournment. If on the tenth day the house of origin shall
be in temporary adjournment in the course of a regular or special session, the bill shall become a
law on the day on which the house of origin shall reconvene, unless the Governor shall on that
day return the bill to that house.
         
(b)     If on the tenth day the Legislature is in adjournment sine die, the bill shall become a law if
the Governor shall sign it within 45 days, Sundays excepted, after such adjournment. On the said
forty-fifth day the bill shall become a law, notwithstanding the failure of the Governor to sign it
within the period last stated, unless at or before noon he shall return it with his objections to the
house of origin:
         
(1) on said forty-fifth day, if the house shall have again convened in regular or special
session of the same 2-year Legislature and shall be meeting on said day, or
         
(2) on the day upon which the house shall reconvene, if it is in temporary adjournment in
the course of a regular or special session of the same 2-year Legislature on said forty-fifth day, or
         
(3) on said forty-fifth day, if the house is an adjournment sine die on said day, at a special
session of the Legislature which shall convene on that day, without petition or call, for the sole
purpose of acting pursuant to this paragraph upon bills returned by the Governor. At such special
session a bill may be reconsidered on or after the first day following return of the bill, in the
manner provided in this paragraph for the reconsideration of bills, and if approved upon
reconsideration by two-thirds of all the members of each house, it shall become a law. The
Governor, in returning with his objections a bill for reconsideration at any general or special
session of the Legislature, may recommend that an amendment or amendments specified by him
be made in the bill, and in such case the Legislature may amend and re-enact the bill. If a bill be
so amended and re-enacted, it shall be presented again to the Governor, but shall become a law
only if he shall sign it within 10 days after presentation; and no bill shall be returned by the
Governor a second time. A special session of the Legislature shall not be convened pursuant to
this paragraph whenever the forty-fifth day, Sundays excepted, after adjournment sine die of a
regular or special session shall fall on or after the last day of the legislative year in which the
second annual session was held; in which event any bill not signed by the Governor within such
45-day period shall not become a law.

Amended Nov. 5, 1968.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 044 001.0 008.0 1 NJ 1945 1963 ***         
         
Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 1

1. (a) Property shall be assessed for taxation under general laws and by uniform rules. All real
property assessed and taxed locally or by the State for allotment and payment to taxing districts
shall be assessed according to the same standard of value, except as otherwise permitted herein,
and such real property shall be taxed at the general tax rate of the taxing district in which the
property is situated, for the use of such taxing district.
         
    (b)     The Legislature shall enact laws to provide that the value of land, not less than 5 acres in
area, which is determined by the assessing officer of the taxing jurisdiction to be actively devoted
to agricultural or horticultural use and to have been so devoted for at least the 2 successive years
immediately preceding the tax year in issue, shall, for local tax purposes, on application of the
owner, be that value which such land has for agricultural or horticultural use.  Any such laws
shall provide that when land which has been valued in this manner for local tax purposes is
applied to a use other than for agriculture or horticulture it shall be subject to additional taxes in
an amount equal to the difference, if any, between the taxes paid or payable on the basis of the
valuation and the assessment authorized hereunder and the taxes that would have been paid or
payable had the land been valued and assessed as otherwise provided in this Constitution, in the
current year and in such of the tax years immediately preceding, not in excess of 2 such years in
which the land was valued as herein authorized.
         
Such laws shall also provide for the equalization of assessments of land valued in accordance
with the provisions hereof and for the assessment and collection of any additional taxes levied
thereupon and shall include such other provisions as shall be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this amendment.
         
Amended Nov. 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 045 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1963 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3 

3. Any citizen and resident of this State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war or of other emergency as, from time
to time, defined by the Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall
be entitled, annually, to a deduction from the amount of any tax bill for taxes on real and
personal property, or both, in the sum of $50.00 or if the amount of any such tax bill shall be less
than $50.00, to a cancellation thereof, which deduction or cancellation shall not be altered or
repealed. Any person hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by the United
States Veterans Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability, shall be
entitled to such further deduction from taxation as from time to time may be provided by law.
The widow of any citizen and resident of this State who has met or shall meet his death on active
duty in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any such service shall be entitled,
during her widowhood, and while a resident of this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this
paragraph provided for honorably discharged veterans and to such further deduction as from time
to time may be provided by law. The widow of any citizen and resident of this State who has had
or shall hereafter have active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any
branch of the Armed Forces of the United States and who died or shall die while on active duty
in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States, or who has been or may hereafter be
honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service in time of
war or of other emergency as so defined in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States
shall be entitled, during her widowhood and while a resident of this State, to the deduction or
cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged veterans and to such further
deductions as
from time to time may be provided by law.
         
Amended Nov. 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 046 004.0 008.0 2 NJ 1945 1958 ***         
         
Article VIII, Section 4, paragraph 2

2. The fund for the support of free public schools, and all money, stock and other property, which
may hereafter be appropriated for that purpose, or received into the treasury under the provisions
of any law heretofore passed to augment the said fund, shall be securely invested, and remain a
perpetual fund; and the income thereof, except so much as it may be judged expedient to apply to
an increase of the capital, shall be annually appropriated to the support of free public schools, and
for the equal benefit of all the people of the State; and it shall not be competent, except as
hereinafter provided, for the Legislature to borrow, appropriate or use the said fund or any part
thereof for any other purpose, under any pretense whatever. The bonds of any school district of
this State, issued according to law, shall be proper and secure investments for the said fund and,
in addition, said fund, including the income therefrom and any other moneys duly appropriated to
the support of free public schools may be used in such manner as the Legislature may provide by
law to secure the payment of the principal of or interest on bonds or notes issued for school
purposes by counties, municipalities or school district or for the payment or purchase of any such
bonds or notes or any claims for interest thereon.
         
Amended November 4, 1958.

*** MEND ***



*** MSTART 047 005.0 011.0 1 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article XI, Section 5, paragraph 1

1.  For the purpose of electing senators in 1967 and until the 1970 decennial census of the United
States for New Jersey shall have been received by the Governor, the forty senators are hereby
allocated among fifteen Senate districts, as follows:

First District B the counties of Gloucester, Atlantic and Cape May, two senators;
Second District B the counties of Salem and Cumberland, one senator;
Third District - the county of Camden, three senators;
Fourth District B the counties of Burlington and Ocean, two senators;
Fifth District B the county of Monmouth, two senators;
Sixth District B the county of Mercer, two senators;
Seventh District B the county of Middlesex, three senators;
Eight District B the county of Somerset, one senator;
Ninth District B the county of Union, three senators;
Tenth District B the county of Morris, two senators;
Eleventh District B the county of Essex, six senators;
Twelfth District B the county of Hudson, four senators;
Thirteenth District B the county of Bergen, five senators;
Fourteenth District B the county of Passaic, three senators; and
Fifteenth District B the counties of Sussex, Warren and Hunterdon, one senator.

New.  Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 048 005.0 011.0 2 NJ 1945 1966 ***
        
Article XI, Section 5, paragraph 2

2. For the purpose of electing members of the General Assembly and the senators from Assembly
districts where so required in 1967 and until the 1970 census of the United States for New Jersey
shall have been received by the Governor, the Assembly districts shall be established by an
Apportionment Commission consisting of ten members, five to be appointed by the chairman of
the state committee of each of the two political parties whose candidates for governor receive the
largest number of votes at the most recent gubernatorial election. Each state chairman, in making
such appointments, shall give due consideration to the representation of the various geographical
areas of the state. Such Apportionment Commission shall be appointed no earlier than November
10 nor later than November 15, 1966, and their appointments shall be certified by the Secretary
of
State on or before December 1, 1966. The Commission, by a majority of the whole number of its
members, shall certify the establishment of Assembly districts to the Secretary of State on or
before February 1, 1967.

New.  Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 049 005.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1966 ***

Article VIII, Section 5, paragraph 3

3. If such Apportionment Commission fails so to certify the establishment of Assembly districts
to the Secretary of State on or before the date fixed or if prior thereto it determines that it will be
unable so to do, it shall so certify to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey, and
he shall appoint an eleventh member of the Commission. Such Commission, by a majority of the
whole number of its members, shall within one month after the appointment of such eleventh
member certify to the Secretary of State the establishment of Assembly districts.
         
Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 050 005.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1966 ***
         
Article VIII, Section 5, paragraph 4

4. The Assembly districts so established shall be used thereafter for the election of members of
the General Assembly and shall remain unaltered until the following decennial census of the
United States for New Jersey shall have been received by the Governor.
         
Adopted Nov. 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 051 004.0 004.0 1 NJ 1945 1988 ***         

Article IV, Section 4, paragraph 1

1.  Any vacancy in the Legislature otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by election
for the unexpired term only at the next general election occurring not less than 51 days after the
occurrence of the vacancy, except that no vacancy shall be filled at the general election which
immediately precedes the expiration of the term in which the vacancy occurs.  For the interim
period pending the election and qualification of a successor to fill the vacancy, or for the
remainder of the term in the case of a vacancy occurring which cannot be filled pursuant to the
terms of this paragraph at a general election, the vacancy shall be filled within 35 days by the
members of the county committee of the political party of which the incumbent was the nominee
from the municipalities or districts or units thereof which comprise the legislative district.
         
Amended Nov. 8, 1988.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 052 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1944 1999 ***

Article IV, Section 7, paragraph 2

2.  No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization:

A.  It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen associations or clubs, volunteer fire
companies; and first-aid, or rescue squads to conduct, under such restrictions and control as shall
from time to time be prescribed, by the Legislature by law,  games of chance of, and restricted to,
the selling of rights to participate, the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance
sometimes known as bingo or lotto, played with cards bearing numbers or other designations,
five or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn
from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated
arrangement of numbers on such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance
are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the
case of senior citizen associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any
municipality, in which a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special
election as the submission thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize
the conduct of such games of chance therein;
          B.  It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen
associations or clubs, volunteer fire companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of
chance of, and restricted to, the selling of rights, to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the
specific kinds of games of chance sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for
prizes or by the allotment of prizes by chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of
chance are to be
devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the case of
senior citizen associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any municipality, in
which such law shall be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general
or special election as the submission thereof shall be prescribed by law and for the Legislature,
from time to time to restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance;
          C.  It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries restricted
to the selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by drawings when the
entire net proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions, and State aid for education;
provided, however, that it shall not be competent for the Legislature to borrow, appropriate or
use, under any pretense whatsoever, lottery net proceeds for the confinement, housing,
supervision or treatment of, or education programs for, adult criminal offenders or juveniles
adjudged delinquent or for the construction, staffing, support, maintenance or operation of an
adult or juvenile correctional facility or institution;
          D.  It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize by law the establishment and
operation, under regulation and control by the State, of gambling houses or casinos within the
boundaries, as heretofore established, of the city of Atlantic City, county of Atlantic, and to
license and tax such operations and equipment used in connection therewith. Any law
authorizing the establishment and operation of such gambling establishments shall provide for
the State revenues derived therefrom to be applied solely for the purpose of providing funding for
reductions in property taxes, rental, telephone, gas, electric, and municipal utilities charges of,
eligible senior citizens and disabled residents of the State, and for additional or expanded health
services or benefits or transportation services or benefits to eligible senior citizens and disabled
residents, in accordance with such formulae as the Legislature shall by law provide. The type and
number of such casinos or gambling houses and of the gambling games which may be conducted
in any such establishment shall be determined by or pursuant to the terms of the law authorizing
the establishment and operation thereof;
          E.  It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, (1) the simultaneous
transmission by picture of running and harness horse races conducted at racetracks located within
or outside of this State, or both, to gambling houses or casinos in the city of Atlantic City and (2)
the a specific kind restrictions and control of wagering at those gambling establishments on the
results of those races. The States share of revenues derived therefrom shall be applied for
services to benefit eligible senior citizens as shall be provided by law; and
          F.  It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, the specific kind, restrictions
and control of wagering on the results of live or simulcast running and harness horse races
conducted within or outside of this State, The State=s share of revenues derived therefrom shall
be used for such purposes as shall be provided by law.

Amended November 2,1999.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 053 001.0 005.0 14 NJ 1945 1983 ***
         
Article V, Section 1, paragraph 14

     14. (a) When a bill has finally passed both houses, the house in which final action was taken
to complete its passage shall cause it to be presented to the Governor before the close of the
calendar day next following the date of the session at which such final action was taken.
            
(b) A passed bill presented to the Governor shall become law:
        (1) if the Governor approves and signs it within the period allowed for his
     consideration;  or,
             (2) if the Governor does not return it to the house of origin, with a statement of his
objections, before the expiration of the period allowed for his consideration; or
         
              (3) if, upon reconsideration of a bill objected to by the Governor, two-thirds of all the
members of each house agree to pass the bill.
         
(c) The period allowed for the Governor=s consideration of a passed bill shall be from the date of
presentation until noon of the forty-fifth day next following or, if the house of  origin be in
temporary adjournment on that day, the first day subsequent upon which the house reconvenes;
except that:
         
               (1) if on the said forty-fifth day the Legislature is in adjournment sine die, any bill then
     pending the Governor=s approval shall be returned, if he objects to it, at a special session
     held pursuant to subparagraph (d) of this paragraph;
         
               (2) any bill passed between the forty-fifth day and the tenth day preceding the expiration of
     the second legislative year shall be returned by the Governor, if he objected to it, not later
     than noon of the day next preceding the expiration of the second legislative year;
         
               (3) any bill passed within 10 days preceding the expiration of the second legislative year
     shall become law only if the Governor signs it prior to noon of the seventh day following
     such expiration, or the Governor returns it to the House of origin, with statement of his
     objections, and two-thirds of all members of each House agree to pass the bill prior to
     such expiration.
     (d) For the purpose of permitting the return of bills pursuant to this paragraph, a special
     session of the Legislature shall convene, without petition or call, for the sole purpose of
     acting upon bills returned by the Governor, on the forty-fifth day next following
     adjournment sine die of the regular session; or, if the second legislative year of a 2-year
     Legislature will expire before said forty fifth day, then the day next preceding the
     expiration of the legislative year.
         
               (e) Upon receiving from the Governor a bill returned by him with his objections, the house
     in which it originated shall enter the objections at large in its journal or minutes and
     proceed to reconsider it. If, upon reconsideration, on or after the third day following its
     return, or the first day of a special session convened for the sole purpose of acting on such
     bills, two-thirds of all the members of the house of origin agree to pass the bill, it shall be
     sent, together with the objections of the Governor, to the other house; and lf upon
     reconsideration, it is approved by two-thirds of all the members of the house, it shall
     become a law. In all such cases the votes of each house shall be determined by yeas and
     nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the
     journal or minutes of each house.
         
               (f) The Governor, in returning with his objections a bill for reconsideration at any general
     or special session of the Legislature, may recommend that an amendment or amendments
     specified by him be made in the bill, and in such case the Legislature may amend and
     re-enact the bill. If a bill be so amended and re-enacted, it shall be presented again to the
     Governor, but shall become a law only if he shall sign it within 10 days after presentation,
     except that any bill amended and reenacted within 10 days preceding the expiration of the
     second legislative year shall become law only if the Governor signs it prior to noon of the
     seventh day following such expiration.  No bill shall be returned by the Governor a
     second time.  No bill need be read three times and no emergency resolution need be
     adopted for the reenactment of any bill at a special session of the Legislature.
         
Amended November 8, 1983.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 054 004.0 005.0 6 NJ 1945 1992 ***

Article V, Section 4, paragraph 6

6. No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority of this state, except
such as relates to the organization or internal management of the State government or a part
thereof, shall take effect until it is filed either with the Secretary of State or in, such other,
manner as may be provided by law.  The Legislature shall provide for the prompt publication of
such rules and regulations.  The Legislature may review any rule or regulation to determine if the
rule or regulation is consistent with the intent of the Legislature as expressed in the language of
the statute which the rule or regulation is intended to implement. Upon a finding that an existing
or proposed rule or regulation is not consistent with legislative intent, the Legislature shall
transmit this finding in the form of a concurrent resolution to the Governor and the head of the
Executive Branch agency which promulgated, or plans to promulgate, the rule or regulation. The
agency shall have 30 days to amend or withdraw the existing or proposed rule or regulation. If
the agency does not amend or withdraw the existing or proposed rule or regulation, the
Legislature may invalidate that rule or regulation, in whole or in part, or may prohibit that
proposed rule or regulation, in whole or in part, from taking effect by a vote of a majority of the
authorized membership of each House in favor of a concurrent resolution providing for
invalidation or prohibition, as the case may be, of the rule or regulation. This vote shall not take
lace until at least 20 calendar days after the placing on the desks of the members of each House
of the Legislature in open meeting of the transcript of a public hearing held by either House on
the invalidation or prohibition of the rule or regulation.
         
Amended November 3, 1992.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 055 003.0 006.0 1 NJ 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 3, paragraph 1

The Superior Court shall consist of such number of judges as may be authorized by law, each of
whom shall exercise the powers of the court subject to rules of the supreme Court.  The Superior
Court shall at all times consist of at least two judges who shall be assigned to sit in each of the
counties of this State, and who are resident therein at the time of appointment and reappointment.

Amended Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 056 003.0 006.0 3 NJ 1945 1983 ***

Article VI, Section 3, paragraph 3

3. The Superior Court shall be divided into an Appellate Division, a Law Division, and a
Chancery Division, which shall include a family part.  Each division shall have such other parts,
consist of such number of judges, and hear such causes, as may be provided by rules of the
Supreme Court.
At least two judges of the Superior court shall at all times be assigned to sit in each of the
counties of the State, who at the time of their appointment and reappointment were residents of
that county provided, however, that the number of judges required to reside in the county wherein
they sit shall be at least equal in number to the number of judges of the county court sitting in
each of the counties at the adoption of this amendment.

Amended Nov. 8, 1983
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 057 006.0 006.0 1 NJ 1945 1983 ***         

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 1

The Governor shall nominate and appoint, with the advice and consent of the senate, the Chief
Justice and associate justices of the Supreme court, the Judges of the Superior Court, and the
judges of the inferior courts with jurisdiction extending to more than one municipality; except
that upon the abolition of the juvenile and domestic relations courts or family court and county
district courts as provided by law, the judges of those former courts shall become the Judges of
the Superior Court without nomination by the Governor or confirmation by the Senate. No
nomination to such an office shall be sent to the Senate for confirmation until after 7 days= public
notice by the Governor.
         
Amended November 8, 1983.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 058 006.0 006.0 2 NJ 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 2

2.  The justices of the supreme court, and the judges of the superior court shall each prior to his
appointment have been admitted the practice of law in this State for at least 10 years.

Amended Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 059 006.0 006.0 3 NJ 1945 1983 *** 

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 3
 
3.  The Justices of the Supreme Court and the Judges of the Superior Court shall hold their
offices for initial terms of 7 years and upon reappointment shall hold their offices during good
behavior; provided however, that, upon the abolition of the juvenile and domestic relations courts
or family court and county district courts as provided by law, the judges in office in those former
courts who have acquired tenure and the Judges of the Superior Court who have acquired tenure
as a judge in those former courts prior to appointment to the Superior Court, shall have tenure as
Judges of the Superior Court.  Judges of the juvenile and domestic relations courts or family
court and county district courts who have not acquired tenure as a judge of those former courts
shall hold their offices for the period of their respective terms which remain unexpired and shall
acquire tenure upon reappointment to the Superior Court. Such justices and judges shall be
retired upon attaining the age of 70 years. Provisions for the pensioning of the Justices of the
Supreme Court and the Judges of the Superior Court shall be made by law.
         
Amended Nov. 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 060 006.0 006.0 4 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 4

4.  The justices of the supreme court and the judges of the superior court shall be subject to
impeachment, and any judicial officer impeached shall not exercise his office until acquitted. The
judges of the superior court shall also be subject to removal from office by the Supreme Court for
such causes and in such manner as shall be provided by law.
  
Amended November 7,1978.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 061 006.0 006.0 5 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 5

5.  Whenever the Supreme Court shall certify to the Governor that it appears that any justice of
the supreme court or judge of the superior court is so incapacitated as substantially to prevent
him from performing his judicial duties, the Governor shall appoint a commission of three
persons to inquire into the circumstances; and, on their recommendation, the Governor may retire
the justice or judge from office, on pension as may be provided by law.
         
Amended November7, 1978.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 062 006.0 006.0 7 NJ 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 6, paragraph 7

7. The justices of the supreme court1 and the judges of the superior court shall hold no other
office or position, of profit, under this State or the United States. Any such justice or judge who
shall become a candidate for an elective public office shall thereby forfeit his judicial office.
         
Amended November 7, 1978.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 063 008.0 006.0 1 NJ 1945 1992 ***

Article VI, Section 8, paragraph 1

1.  a.  On or before July 1, 1997:

          (1)The State shall be required to pay for certain judicial and probation costs;
          (2) All judicial employees and probation employees shall be employees of the State and 
          (3) Any judicial fees and probation fees collected shall be paid to the State Treasury.            
   
b.  As used in this section:
         
          (1)  Judicial facility costs means any costs borne by the counties prior to July 1, 1998
         with regard to the operation and maintenance of facilities used by the courts or judicial
         employees;
          (2) Probation facility costs means any costs borne by the counties prior to July 1,
         1993 with regard to the operation and maintenance of facilities used by probation
         employees;
               (3) Judicial costs means the costs incurred by the county for funding the judicial system,
     including but not limited to the following costs: salaries, health benefits and pension
     payments of all judicial employees, juror fees and library material costs, except that
     judicial costs shall not include costs incurred by employees of the surrogates office or
     judicial facility costs;
          (4) Judicial employees means any person employed by the county prior to July 1,
               1993 to perform judicial functions, including but not limited to employees working for
     the courts and the law library and employees of the sheriff's office who act as court
     aides, except that employees of he surrogate's office and probation employees shall not
            be construed to be judicial employees;
          (5) Judicial fees means any fees or fines collected by the judiciary but shall not
            include sheriff's or surrogate's fees or  municipal court fees or fines;
               (6) Judicial functions means any duties and responsibilities performed in providing any
     services and. direct support necessary for the effective operation of the judicial system;
          (7) Probation costs means any costs incurred by the county for the operation of the
            county probation department, including but not limited to the costs of salaries, health
            benefits, and pension payments of probation employees but shall not include probation
            facility coats;
               (8) Probation employees means any person employed by a county probation department
     prior to July 1,1993;
          (9) Probation fees means any fees or fines collected in connection with the probation
         of any persons.
         
New.  Adopted November 3, 1992.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 064 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1999 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3

Any citizen and resident of this State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war or other emergency as, from time to
time, defined by the Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be
entitled, annua1ly to a deduction from the amount of any tax bill for taxes on real and personal
property, or both, Including taxes attributable to a residential unit held by a stockholder in a
cooperative or mutual housing corporation, in the sum of $50 or if the amount of any such tax
bill shall be less than $50, to a cancellation thereof, except that the deduction or cancellation
shall be $100.00 in tax year 2000, $150 in tax year 2001, $200 in tax year 2002 and $250 in each
tax year thereafter. The deduction or cancellation shall not be altered or repealed. Any person
hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by the United States Veterans
Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability, shall be entitled to such
further deduction from taxation as from, time to time may be provided by law. The surviving
spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has met or shall meet his or her death on
active duty in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any such service shall be
entitled, during her widowhood or his widowerhood, as the case may be, and while a resident Of
this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged
veterans and to such further deduction as from time to time may be provided by law. The
surviving spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has had or shall hereafter have
active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any branch of the Armed
Forces of the United States and who died or shall die while on active duty in any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States, or who has been or may hereafter be honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstance from active service in time of war or of other emergency
as so defined in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled, during her
widowhood or his widowerhood, as the case may be, and while a resident of this State, to the
deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged veterans and to
such further deductions as from time to time may be provided bylaw. 
         
Amended November 2, 1999.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 065 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1988 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

4.  The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property, and from tax attributable to a residential unit
in a cooperative or mutual housing corporation, of a citizen and resident of this State of the age
of 65 or more years, or any citizen and  resident of this State less than 65 years of age who is
permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act,
residing in a dwelling or house owned by him which is a constituent part of such real property or
residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is assessed as a real property but which is
situated on land owned by another or others, or residing as tenant-shareholder in a cooperative or
mutual housing corporation, but no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00 with respect to
any year prior to 1981, $200.00 per year in 1981, $225.00 per year in 1982, an $250.00 per year
in 1983 and any year thereafter and such deduction shall be restricted to owners having an
income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year with respect to any year prior to 1981, $8,000.00 per
year in 1981, $9,000.00 per year in 1982, and $10,000.00 per year in 1983 and any year
thereafter, exclusive of benefits under any one of the following:
          a.  The Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and supplements thereto;
               b.  Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any other federal law
     which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu of benefits referred to in, or for persons
     excluded from coverage under, a. hereof including but not limited to the Federal
Railroad Retirement Act and federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or 
               c.  Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political subdivision or
     agencies thereof, for persons not covered under a. hereof; provided, however, that the
     total amount of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under b. or c. here shall
     not be in excess of the maximum amount of benefits payable to, and allowable for
     exclusion by, an owner in similar circumstances under a. hereof.

    The surviving spouse of a deceased citizen and resident of the State who during his or her life
received a deduction pursuant to this paragraph shall be entitled, so long as he or she shall remain
unmarried and a resident of the same dwelling house situated on the same land with respect to
which said deduction was granted, to the same deduction, upon the same conditions, with respect
to the same real property or with respect to the same dwelling house which is situated on land
owned by another or others, or with respect to the same cooperative or mutual housing
corporation, notwithstanding that said surviving spouse is under the age of 65 and is not
permanently and totally disabled, provided that said surviving spouse is 55 years of age or older.

    Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition
to any other deduction or exemption, except a deduction granted under authority of paragraph 3
of this section, to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled, but said citizen and resident
may receive in addition any homestead rebate or credit provided by law. The State shall annually
reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to one-half of the tax loss to the district
resulting from the allowance of tax deductions pursuant to this paragraph.

Amended Nov. 8, 1988.                        

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 066 001.0 008.0 5 NJ 1945 1976 ***         

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 5

5.  The Legislature may adopt a homestead statute which entitles homeowners residential tenants
and net lease residential tenants to a rebate or a credit of a sum of money related to property taxes
paid by or allocable to them at such rates and subject to such limits as may be provided by law.
Such rebates or credits may include differential rate or credit to citizens and residents who are of
the age of 65 or more years, or less than 65 years of age who are permanently and totally disabled
according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act, or are 55 years of age or more and
the surviving spouse of a deceased citizen or resident of this State who during his lifetime
received, or who, upon the adoption of this amendment and the enactment of implementing
legislation, would have been entitled to receive a rebate or credit related to property taxes.
         
Amended November 2,1976.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 067 001.0 008.0 6 NJ 1945 1976 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 6

6.  The Legislature may enact general laws under which municipalities may adopt ordinances
granting exemptions or abatements from taxation on buildings and structures in areas declared in
need of rehabilitation in accordance with statutory criteria, within such municipalities and to the
land comprising the premises upon which such buildings or structures are erected and which is.
necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof. Such exemptions shall be for limited periods of time as
specified by law, but not in excess of 5 years.
New.  Adopted November 4,1975.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 068 001.0 008.0 7 NJ 1945 1984 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 7

7.   No tax shall be levied on personal incomes of individuals, estates and trusts of this State
unless the entire net receipts therefrom shall be received into the treasury, placed in a perpetual
fund and be annually appropriated, pursuant to formulas established from time to time by the
Legislature, to the several counties, municipalities and school districts of this State exclusively
for the purpose of reducing or offsetting property taxes. In no event, however, shall a tax so
levied on personal incomes be levied on payments received under the federal Social Security Act,
the federal Railroad Retirement Act, or any federal law which substantially reenacts the
provisions of either of those laws.
         
Amended November 6, 1984.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 068 002.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1983 ***
         
Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 3

3.   The Legislature shall not, in any manner, create in any fiscal year a debt or debts, liability or
liabilities of the State, which together with any previous debts or liabilities shall exceed at any
time one per centum of the total amount appropriated by the general appropriation law for that
fiscal year, unless the same shall be authorized by a law for some single object or work distinctly
specified therein.  Regardless of any limitation relating to taxation in this constitution, such law
shall provide the ways and means exclusive of loans, to pay the interest of such debt or liability
as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principle thereof within thirty-five years form the
time it is contracted; and the law shall not be repealed until such debt or liability and the interest
thereon are fully paid and discharged.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no such law shall take effect until it shall have been submitted
to the people at a general election and approved by a majority of the legally qualified voters of
the State voting thereon.  No voter approval shall be required for any such law authorizing the
creation of a debt or debts in a specified amount or an amount to be determined in accordance
with such law for the refinancing of all or a portion of any outstanding debts or liabilities of the
State heretofore or hereafter created, so long as such law shall require that the refinancing
provide a debt service savings determined in a manner to be provided in such a law and that the
proceed of such debt or debts and any investment income therefrom shall be applied to the
payment of the principal of, any redemption premium on, and interest due and to become due on
such debts or liabilities being refinanced on or prior to the redemption date or maturity date
thereof, together with the costs associated with such refinancing.  All money to be raised by the
authority of such law shall be applied only to the specific object stated therein, and to the
payment of the debt thereby created.  This paragraph shall not be construed to refer to any money
that has been or may be deposited with this State by the government of the United States.  Nor
shall anything in this paragraph contained apply to the creation of any debts or liabilities for
purposes of war, or to repel invasion, or to suppress insurrection tor to meet any emergency
caused by disaster or act of God.

Amended Nov. 8, 1938
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 069 002.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 4 

4.  There shall be credited to a special account in the General Fund for the State fiscal year in
which the amendment to this paragraph is approved by the voters an amount equivalent to the
revenue derived from $0.025 per gallon from the tax imposed on the sale of motor fuels pursuant
to chapter 39 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes, and an amount equivalent to the revenue
derived from $0.07 per gallon from the tax shall be credited to the account in each of the first two
State fiscal years commencing after the approval of the amendment to this paragraph by the
voters, and an amount equivalent to the revenue derived from $0.09 per gallon from the tax shall
be credited to the account in the fourth State fiscal year commencing after the approval of the
amendment to this paragraph by the voters and annually thereafter; provided, however, the
dedication and use of such revenues as provided in this paragraph shall be subject and
subordinate to (a) all appropriations of revenues from such taxes made by laws enacted on or
before December 6, 1984 in accordance with Article VIII, Section II paragraph 3 of the State
Constitution in order to provide the ways and means to pay the principal and interest on bonds of
the State presently outstanding or authorized to be issued under such laws or (b) any other use of
those revenues enacted into law on or before December 6, 1984.  These amounts shall be
appropriated from time to time by the Legislature, only for the purposes of paying or financing
the cost of planning, acquisition, engineering, construction, reconstruction, repair and
rehabilitation of the transportation system in this State and it shall not be competent for the
Legislature to borrow, appropriate or us these amounts or any part thereof for any other purpose,
under any pretense whatever.

 Amended Nov. 7, 1995

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART  070 00.02 00.08 5 NJ 1945 1995 ***

Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 5

5. (a) With respect to any provision of a law enacted on and after January 17, 1996, and with
respect to any rule or regulation issued pursuant to a law originally adopted after July 1, 1996,
and except as otherwise provided herein, any provision of such law, or of such rule or regulation
issued pursuant to a law, which is determined in accordance with this paragraph to be an
unfunded mandate upon boards of education, counties, or municipalities because it does not
authorize resources, other than the property tax, to offset the additional direct expenditures
required for the implementation of the law or rule or regulation, shall, upon such determination
cease to be mandatory in its effect and expire.  A law or rule or regulation issued pursuant to a
law that is determined to be an unfunded mandate shall not be considered to establish a standard
of care for the purpose of civil liability.
(b) The Legislature shall create by law a Council on Local Mandates.  The Council shall resolve
any dispute regarding whether a law or rule or regulation issued pursuant to a law constitutes and
unfunded mandate.  The Council shall consist of nine public members appointed as follows: four
members to be appointed by the Governor; one member to be appointed by the President of the
Senate; one member to be appointed by the Speaker of the General Assembly; one member to be
appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; one member to be appointed by the minority
leader of the General Assembly; and one member to be appointed by the Chief Justice of the
New Jersey Supreme Court.  Of the members appointed by the Governor, at least two shall be
appointed from a list of six willing nominees submitted by the chairman of the political party
whose candidate for Governor received the second largest number of votes at the recent
gubernatorial general election.  The decisions of the Council shall be political and not judicial
determinations.
(c) Notwithstanding anything in this paragraph to the contrary, the following categories of laws
or rules or regulations issued pursuant to a law, shall not be considered unfunded mandates:
(1) those which are required to comply with federal laws or rules or to meet eligibility standards
for federal entitlements;
(2) those which are imposed on both government and non-government entities in the same or
substantially similar circumstances;
(3) those which repeal, revise or ease an existing requirement or mandate or which reapportion
the costs of activities between boards of education, counties, and municipalities;
(4) those which stem from failure to comply with previously enacted laws or rules or regulations
issued pursuant to a law;
(5) those which implement the provisions of this Constitution; and
(6) laws which are enacted after a public hearing, held after public notice that unfunded mandates
will be considered, for which a fiscal analysis is available at the time of the public hearing and
which, in addition to complying with all other constitutional requirements with regard to the
enactment of laws, are passed by 3/4 affirmative vote of the members of each House of the
Legislature.

New.  Adopted Nov. 7, 1995.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 071 002.0 008.0 6 NJ 1945 1996 ***

Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 6

6.  There shall be credited annually to a special account in the General Fund an amount
equivalent to 4% of the revenue annually derived from the tax imposed pursuant to the
Corporation Business Tax Act (1945), P.L. 1945, c. 162 (C. 54:10a-1 et seq.) as amended and
supplemented, or any other State law of similar effect.
The amount annually credited pursuant to this paragraph shall be dedicated and shall be
appropriated from time to time by the Legislature only for the following purposes: paying or
financing costs incurred by the State for the remediation of discharges of hazardous substances,
which costs may include performing necessary operation and maintenance activities relating to
remedial actions and costs incurred for providing alternative sources of public or private water
supplies, when a water supply has been, or is suspected of being, contaminated by a hazardous
substance discharge; providing funding, including the provision of loans or grants, for the
upgrade, replacement, or closure of underground storage tanks that store or were used to store
hazardous substances, and for the costs of remediating any discharge therefrom; and for paying
or financing the cost of water quality point and nonpoint source pollution monitoring, watershed
based water resource planning and management, and nonpoint source pollution prevention
projects.
It shall not be competent for the Legislature, under any pretense whatever, to borrow,
appropriate, or use the amount credited to the special account pursuant to this paragraph, or any
portion thereof, for any purpose or in any manner other than as enumerated in this paragraph.  It
shall not be competent for the Legislature, under any pretense whatever, to borrow appropriate,
or use the amount credited to the special account pursuant to this paragraph, or any portion
thereof, for the payment of the principal or interest on any general obligation bond that was
approved by the voters prior to this paragraph becoming part of this constitution.
(a) A minimum of one-sixth of the amount annually credited pursuant to this paragraph, or a
minimum of an equal to $5,000,000.00 per year, whichever is less, shall be dedicated, and shall
be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature, only for paying or financing the cost of
water quality point and nonpoint source pollution monitoring, watershed based water resource
planning and management, and nonpoint source pollution projects.
(b) A minimum of one-third of the amount annually credited pursuant to this paragraph shall be
dedicated, and shall be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature, only for providing
funding, including the provision of loans or grants, for the upgrade, replacement, or closure of
underground storage tanks that store or were used to store hazardous substances, and for the costs
of remediating any discharge therefrom, except that the dedication of moneys pursuant to this
subparagraph (b) shall expire on December 8, 2008 and may thereafter be dedicated and
appropriated from time to time by the Legislature for any of the purposes authorized pursuant to
subparagraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this paragraph.  All moneys derived from repayments of any loan
issued from the amount dedicated pursuant to this subparagraph (b) shall be dedicated, and shall
be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature, only for the purposes authorized pursuant
to ths subparagraph (b).  The dedication of moneys derived from loan repayments shall not
expire.  No moneys appropriated pursuant to this subparagraph (b) may be expended on any
direct or indirect administrative costs of the State or any of its departments, agencies, or
authorities.  No moneys appropriated pursuant to this subparagraph (b) may be expended on any
upgrade, replacement, or closure of any underground storage tank, or for the remediation of any
discharge therefrom, for any underground storage tank owned by the State or any of its
departments, agencies, or authorities.
(c) A minimum of one-half of the amount annually credited pursuant to this paragraph shall be
dedicated, and shall be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature, only for paying or
financing costs incurred by the State for the remediation of discharges of hazardous substances,
which costs may include performing necessary operation and maintenance activities relating to
remedial actions and costs incurred for providing alternative sources of public or private water
supplies, when a water supply has been, or is suspected of being, contaminated by a hazardous
substance discharge.  No moneys appropriated pursuant to this subparagraph (c) may be
expended for any indirect administrative costs of the State, its departments, agencies or
authorities.  No more than nine percent of the moneys annually credited pursuant to this
paragraph, which shall be taken from the amount dedicated pursuant to this subparagraph (c) may
be expended for any direct program administrative costs of the State, its departments, agencies,
or authorities.  If the Legislature dedicates for the purposes of this subparagraph (c) any moneys
above the minimum that is required to be dedicated pursuant to this subparagraph (c), those
moneys may not be expended for any direct or indirect administrative costs of the State, its
departments, agencies, or authorities.

New.  Adopted Nov. 5, 1996.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 072 002.0 008.0 7 NJ 1945
 
Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 7

(a) Commencing on July 1, 1999, there shall be credited in each State fiscal year, until June 30,
2009, to a special account in the General Fund $98,000,000 from the State revenue annually
collected from the State tax imposed under the Sales and Use Tax Act, P.L. 1966, c. 30
(C.54:32B-1et. seq.), as amended and supplemented, or from any other State law of similar
effect.  The dedication and use of those moneys credited pursuant to this subparagraph shall be
subject and subordinate to (1) all appropriations of revenues from taxes made by laws enacted
prior to the effective date of this paragraph in accordance with Article VIII, Section II paragraph
3 of the State Constitution in order to provide the ways and means to pay the principal and
interest on bonds of the State presently outstanding or authorized to be issued under those laws or
(2) any other use of those revenues enacted into law prior to the effective date of this paragraph. 
The amount credited each State fiscal year pursuant to this subparagraph shall be dedicated and
shall be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature only to: provide funding, including
loans or grants, for the acquisition and development of lands for recreation and conservation
purposes, for the preservation of farmland for agricultural or horticultural use and production,
and for historic preservation; and satisfy any payments relating to bonds, notes, or other
obligations, including refunding bonds, issued by an authority or similar entity established by law
to provide funding, including loans and grants, for the acquisition and development of lands for
recreation and conservation purposes, for the preservation of farmland for agricultural or
horticultural use and production, and for historic preservation.   
(b)Commencing July 1, 2009 and ending June 30, 2029, there shall be credited in each
State fiscal year to a special account in the General Fund from the State revenue annually
collected from the State tax imposed under the Sales and Use Tax Act, P.L. 1966, c. 30
(C.54:32B-1 et. seq.) as amended and supplemented, or from any other State law of similar
effect, the lesser of $98,000,000 or the amount necessary in each State fiscal year to satisfy any
payments relating to bonds, notes, or other obligations, including refunding bonds, issued by an
authority or similar entity established by law to provide funding, including loans and grants, for
the acquisition and development of lands for recreation and conservation purposes, for the
preservation of farmland for agricultural or horticultural use and production, and for historic
preservation.  The dedication and use of those moneys credited pursuant to this subparagraph
shall be subject and subordinate to (1) all appropriations of revenues from taxes made by laws
enacted prior to the effective date of this paragraph in accordance with Article VII Section II,
paragraph 3 of the State Constitution in order to provide the ways and means to pay the principal
and interest on bonds of the State presently outstanding or authorized to be issued under those
laws, or (2) any other use of those revenues enacted into law prior to the effective date of this
paragraph.  The amount credited each State fiscal year pursuant to this subparagraph shall be
dedicated and shall be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature only to satisfy any
payments relating to bonds, notes, or other obligations, including refunding bonds, issued by an
authority or similar entity established by law to provide funding, including loans and grants, for
the acquisition and development of lands for recreation and conservation purposes, for the
preservation of farmland for agricultural or horticultural use and production, and for historic
preservation.
(c) Moneys credited to the special account pursuant to this paragraph shall not be used for (1)
payments related to bonds, notes, or other obligation which in aggregate principal amount exceed
$1,000,000,000 plus costs of issuance; or (2) payments relating to bonds, notes, or other
obligations, except refunding bonds, issued after Jun 30, 2009.
(d) The authority or similar entity established by law as described in this paragraph shall consist
of members appointed by the Governor and members appointed by the Legislature.  
(e) All moneys derived from repayments of any loan issued from the amounts dedicated pursuant
to subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, and all income derived from the investment of moneys in
the special account established pursuant to this paragraph, shall be credited to that special 
account, and shall be dedicated and shall be appropriated from time to time by the Legislature
only for the purpose of providing funding, including loans and grants, for the acquisition and
development of lands for recreation and conservation purposes, for the preservation of farmland
for agricultural or horticultural use and production, and for historic preservation. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, the dedication of moneys
derived from loan repayments and investments shall not expire.  
(f) It shall not be competent for the Legislature, under any pretense whatever, to borrow,
appropriate, or use the amounts credited to the special account established pursuant to this
paragraph, or any portion thereof, for any purpose or in any manner other than as enumerated in
this paragraph.

New.  Adopted Nov. 3, 1998.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 073 004.0 011.0 1 NJ 1945 1978 ***

Article XI, Section 4, paragraph 1

When this amendment to the Constitution providing for the abolition of the County Courts takes
effect: 
(a) All the jurisdiction, functions, powers and duties of the County Court of each county, the
judicial officers, clerks, employees thereof, and the causes pending therein, and their files, shall
be transferred to the Superior Court.  Until otherwise provided by law, the judicial officers,
surrogates and clerks of the County Courts and the employees of said officers, clerks, surrogates
and courts, shall continue in the exercise of their duties as if this amendment had not been
adopted.  For the purposes of this paragraph, a cause shall be deemed to be pending
notwithstanding that an adjudication has been entered therein, provided the time limited for
appeal has not expired or the adjudication reserves any party the right to apply for further relief.
(b) All the functions, powers and duties conferred by the statute, rules or otherwise, upon the
judges of the County Courts, shall be transferred to and may be exercised by judges of the
Superior Court until otherwise provided by law or rules of the Supreme Court.
(c) Until otherwise provided by law, all county clerks shall become clerks of the Law Division of
the superior Court and all surrogates shall become clerks of he Chancery Division (Probate Part)
of the Superior Court for their respective counties and shall perform such duties and maintain
such files and records on behalf of the Clerk of the Superior Court as may be required by law and
rule of court; and all fees payable to the county clerks and surrogates prior to the effective date of
this amendment shall continue to be so payable and be received for the use of their respective
counties until otherwise provided by law.
(d) The judges of the County Courts in office on the effective date of this amendment shall be
judges of the Superior Court.  All such judges who had acquired tenure on a County Court shall
hold office as a judge of the Superior Court during good behavior, with all rights, and subject to
all the provisions of the Constitution affecting a judge of the Superior Court, as though they were
initially appointed to the Superior Court.  All other judges of the county Courts shall hold office
as judges of the Superior Court, each for the period his term which remains unexpired on the
effective date of this amendment; and if reappointed, he shall hold office during good behavior,
with all the rights and subject to all the provisions of the Constitution affecting a judge of the
Superior Court as though he were initially appointed to the Superior Court.

New.  Adopted Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 074 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1972 ***

Article IV, Section 7, Paragraph 2

2.  No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State voting
at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;

   A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen associations or clubs, volunteer fire
companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct, under such restrictions and control as shall
from time to time be prescribed by the Legislature by law, games of chance of, and restricted to,
the selling of rights to participate, the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance
sometimes known as bingo or lotto, played with cards bearing numbers or other designations, 5
or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from
a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated
arrangement of numbers on such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance
are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the
case of senior citizen associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any
municipality, in which a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special
election as the submission thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize
the conduct of such games of chance therein.
         
   B. It shall be lawful for the legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies
and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of
rights to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of games of chance
sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by
chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in any municipality, in which such law shall
be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as
the submission thereof shall be prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to
restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance and

  C. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries restricted to
the selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by drawings when the entire
net proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions, state aid for education.
         
 Amended November 7, 1972.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 075 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1971 ***
 
Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

4.  The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the
age of 65 or more years residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of
such real property but no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00 and such deduction shall
be restricted to owners having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year exclusive of
benefits under any one of the following:
            a.     the Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and supplements thereto;
                 b.     any other program of the Federal Government or pursuant to any other Federal law
     which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu of benefits referred to in, or for persons
     excluded from coverage under, a. hereof including but not limited to the Federal Railroad
     Retirement Act and Federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or
                 c.     pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political subdivisions, or
     agencies thereof, for persons not covered under a. hereof; provided, however, that the
     total amount of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under b. or c. hereof shall
     not be in excess of the maximum amount of benefits payable to, and allowable for
     exclusion by, an owner in similar circumstances under a. hereof.
         
   Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition to
any other deduction or exemption to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled. The
State shall annually reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to 2 of the tax loss to the
district resulting from the allowance of tax deductions pursuant to this paragraph.
         
Amended November 2, 1971.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 076 001.0 008.0 7 1945 1976 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 7

7.   No tax shall be levied on personal incomes of individuals, estates and trusts of this State
unless the entire net receipts therefrom shall be received into the treasury, placed in a perpetual
fund and be annually appropriated, pursuant to formulas established from time to time by the
Legislature, to the several counties, municipalities and school districts of this State exclusively
for the purpose of reducing or offsetting property taxes.
         
New.  Adopted November 2, 1976.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 077 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1975 ***

Article 8, Section 1, paragraph 4

4.   The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the
age of 65 or more years, or any citizen and resident of this State less than 65 years of age who is
permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act,
residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of such real property but
no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00 and such deduction shall be restricted to owners
having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year exclusive of benefits under any one of the
following:
            a.     The Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and supplements thereto;
                 b.     Any other program of the Federal Government or pursuant to any other Federal law
     which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu of benefits referred to in, or for persons
     excluded from coverage under, a. hereof including but not limited to the Federal Railroad
     Retirement Act and Federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or         

                c. Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political subdivisions, or
     agencies thereof, for persons not covered under a. hereof;
provided, however, that the total amount of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under
b. or c. hereof shall not be in excess of the maximum amount of benefits payable to, and
allowable for exclusion by, an owner in similar circumstances under a. hereof.

   The surviving spouse of a deceased citizen and resident of this State who during his or her life
received a real property tax deduction pursuant to this paragraph shall be entitled, so long as he
or she shall remain unmarried and a resident in the same dwelling house with respect to which
said deduction was granted, to the same deduction, upon the same conditions, with respect to the
same real property, notwithstanding that said surviving spouse is under the age of 65 and is not
permanently and totally disabled, provided that said surviving spouse is 55 years of age or older.
   Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition to
any other deduction or exemption to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled, but said
citizen and resident may receive in addition any homestead rebate or credit provided by law. The
State shall annually reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to one-half of the tax loss
to the district resulting from the allowance of tax deductions pursuant to this paragraph.
           
Amended November 4, 1975 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 078 006.0 006.0 1 NJ 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 6, Paragraph 1

1.  The Governor shall nominate and appoint, with the advice and consent of the Senate, the
Chief Justice and associate justices of the supreme court, the judges of the superior court, and the
judges of the inferior courts with jurisdiction extending to more than one municipality. No
nomination to such an office shall be sent to the Senate for confirmation until after 7 days= public
notice by the Governor.

Amended November 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 079 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1976 ***

 Article IV, Section 7, paragraph 2 
  
2. No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;
                A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
     organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen associations or clubs, volunteer fire
     companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct, under  such restrictions and control
     as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Legislature by law, games of chance of,
     and restricted to, the selling of rights to participate, the awarding of prizes, in the specific
     kind of game of chance sometimes known as bingo or lotto, played with cards bearing
     numbers or other designations, 5 or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as
     objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the
     person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on such a card,
     when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
     charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the case of senior citizen
     associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any municipality, in which a
     majority of the
     qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as the submission thereof
     shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize the conduct of such games
     of chance therein.
         
                B. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
     educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire
     companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of, and restricted to,
     the selling of rights to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of
     games of chance sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by
     the allotment of prizes by chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance
     are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in
     any municipality, in which such law shall be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters,
     voting thereon,, at a general or special election as the submission thereof shall be
     prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to restrict and control, by
     law, the conduct of such games of chance and
 
                C.. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries
     restricted to the selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by
     drawings when the entire net proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions,
     state aid for education.
         
                D. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize by law the establishment and
     operation, under regulation and control by the State, of gambling houses or casinos within
     the boundaries, as heretofore established, of the city of Atlantic City, county of Atlantic,
     and to license and tax such operations and equipment used in connection therewith. Any
     law authorizing the establishment and operation of such gambling establishments shall
     provide for the State revenues derived therefrom to be applied solely for the purpose of
     providing reductions in property taxes, rentals, telephone, gas, electric, and municipal
     utilities charges of eligible senior citizens and disabled residents of the State, in
     accordance with such formulae as the Legislature shall by law provide. The type and
     number of such casinos or gambling houses and of the gambling games which may be
     conducted in any such establishment shall be determined by or pursuant to the terms of
     the law authorizing the establishment and operation thereof.
         
Amended November 2, 1976.

*** MEND***
*** MSTART 080 003.0 006.0 3 NJ 1945 1978 ***
         
Article VI, Section 3, paragraph 3 

3.  The Superior Court shall be divided into an Appellate Division, a Law Division, and a
Chancery Division.  Each division shall have such part, consist of such number of judges, and
hear such causes, as may be provided by rules of the Supreme Court.  At least two judges of the
Superior Court shall at all times be assigned to sit in each of the counties of the State, who at the
time of their appointment and reappointment were residents of that county provided, however,
that the number of judges required to reside in the county wherein they sit shall be at least equal
in number to the number of judges of the county court sitting in each of the counties at the
adoption of this amendment.
         
Amended Nov. 7, 1978.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 701 004.0 006.0 1 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 4 repealed Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 702 004.0 006.0 2 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 4 repealed Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 703 004.0 006.0 3 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 4 repealed Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 704 004.0 006.0 4 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 4 repealed Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 705 004.0 006.0 5 1945 1978 ***

Article VI, Section 4 repealed Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 081 005.0 004.0 1 1945 1978 ***

Article IV, Section 5, paragraph 1

1.   Appeals may be taken to the Supreme Court:
(a) In causes determined by the Appellate Division of the Superior Court involving a question
arising under the Constitution of the United States or this State;
(b) In causes where there is a dissent in the Appellate Division of the Superior Court;
(c) In capital cases;
(d) On certification by the Supreme Court to the Superior Court and, where provided by rules of
the Supreme Court, to the inferior courts; and
(e) In such causes as may be provided by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 082 005.0 004.0 2 1945 1978 ***

Article IV, Section 5, paragraph 2

2.  Appeals may be taken to the Appellate Division of the Superior Court from the law and
chancery divisions of the Superior Court and in such other causes as may be provided by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1978

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 083 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1980 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

4.  The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the
age of 65 or more years, or any citizen and resident of this State less than 65 years of age who is
permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act,
residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of such real property but
no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00 with respect to any year prior to 1981, $200.00
per year in 1981, $225.00 per year in 1982, and $250.00 per year in 1983 and any year thereafter
and such deduction shall be restricted to owners having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per
year with respect to any year prior to 1981, $8000.00 per year in 1981, $9,000.00 per year in
1982, and $10,000 per year in 1983 and any year thereafter, exclusive of benefits under any one
of the following:
   a.  The Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and supplements thereto;
   b.  Any other program of the Federal Government or pursuant to any other Federal law which
provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu of benefits referred to in, or for persons excluded
from coverage under, a. hereof including but not limited to the Federal Railroad Retirement Act
of Federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or
   c.  Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political subdivision, or
agencies thereof, for persons not covered under a. hereof;         
provided, however, however, that the total amount of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any
owner under b. or c. hereof shall not be in excess of the maximum amount of benefits payable to,
and allowable for exclusion by, an owner in similar circumstances under a. hereof.
   The surviving spouse of a deceased citizen and resident of this State who during his or her life
received a real property tax deduction pursuant to this paragraph shall be entitled, so long as he
or she shall remain unmarried and a resident in the same dwelling house with respect to which
said deduction was granted, to the same deduction, upon the same conditions, with respect to the
same real property, notwithstanding that said surviving spouse is under the age of 65 and is not
permanently and totally disabled, provided that said surviving spouse is 55 years of age or older. 
Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition to
any other deduction or exemption to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled, but said
citizen and resident may receive in addition any homestead rebate or credit provided by law.  The
State shall annually reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to one-half of the tax loss
to the district resulting from the allowance of tax deduction pursuant to this paragraph.
         
Amended November 4, 1980.         

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 084 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1981 ***

Article IV, Section 7, Paragraph 2   
      
2. No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization;
         
A. It shall be lawful for bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen associations or clubs, volunteer fire
companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct, under such restrictions and control as shall
from time to time be prescribed by the Legislature by law, games of chance of, and restricted to,
the selling of rights to participate, the awarding of prizes, in the specific kind of game of chance
sometimes known as bingo or lotto, played with cards bearing numbers or other designations,
five or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn
from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated
arrangement of numbers on such a card, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance
are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the
case of senior citizen associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any
municipality, in which a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special
election as the submission thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize
the conduct of such games of chance therein.
         
B. It shall he lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans, charitable,
educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer fire companies
and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of
rights to participate, and the awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of games of chance
sometimes known as raffles, conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by
chance, when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to he devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, in any municipality, in which such law shall
be adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as
the submission thereof shall he prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from time to time, to
restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance and
         
C. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries restricted to the
selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by drawings when the entire net
proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions, State aid for education.
         
D. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize by law the establishment and operation,
under regulation and control by the State, of gambling houses or casinos within the boundaries,
as heretofore established, of the city of Atlantic City, county of Atlantic, and to license and tax
such operations and equipment used in connection therewith. Any law authorizing the
establishment arid operation of such gambling establishments shall provide for the State revenues
derived therefrom to be applied solely for the purpose of providing funding for reductions in
property taxes, rental, telephone, gas, electric, and municipal utilities charges of, eligible senior
citizens and disabled residents of the State, and for additional or expanded health services or
benefits or transportation services or benefits to eligible senior citizens and disabled residents, in
accordance with such formulae as the Legislature shall by law provide. The type and number of
such casinos or gambling houses and of the gambling games which may be conducted in any
such establishment shall be determined by or pursuant to the terms of the law authorizing the
establishment and operation thereof.
         
Amended November 3, 1981.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 085 001.0 005.0 14 NJ 1945 1981 ***

Article V, Section 1, paragraph 14

14.    (a) When a bill has finally passed both houses, the house in which final action was taken to
complete its passage shall cause it to be presented to the Governor before the close of the
calendar day next following the date of the session at which such final action was taken.
         (b)  A passed bill presented to the Governor shall become law:
                    (1)  if the Governor approves and signs it within the period allowed for his             
     consideration; or,
                    (2)  if the Governor does not return it to the house of origin, with a statement of his
     objections, before the expiration of the period allowed for his consideration; or,
                    (3)  if, upon reconsideration of a bill objected to by the Governor, two-thirds of all the
     members of each house agree to pass the bill.
               (c)  The period allowed for the Governor's consideration of a passed bill shall be from the
     date of presentation until noon of the forty-fifth day next following or, if the house of
     origin be in temporary adjournment on that day, the first day subsequent upon which the
     house reconvenes; except that:
                    (1)  if on the said forty-fifth day the Legislature is in adjournment sine die, any bill then
     pending the Governor's approval shall be returned, if he objects to it, at a special session
     held pursuant to subparagraph (d) of this paragraph;
                    (2)  any bill passed between the forty-fifth day and the tenth day preceding the
     expiration of the second legislative year shall be returned by the Governor, if he objects to
     it, not later than noon of the day next preceding the expiration of the second legislative
     year;
                    (3)  any bill passed within 10 days preceding the expiration of the second legislative
     year shall become law only if the Governor signs it prior to such expiration, or the
     Governor returns it to the house of origin, with a statement of his objections, and
     two-thirds of all members of each House agree to pass the bill prior to such expiration.
                 (d)    For the purpose of permitting the return of bills pursuant to this paragraph, a special
     session of the Legislature shall convene, without petition or call, for the sole purpose of
     acting upon bills returned by the Governor, on the forty-fifth day next following
     adjournment sine die of the regular session; or, if the second legislative year of a 2-year
     Legislature will expire before said forty-fifth day, then the day next preceding the
     expiration of the legislative year.
                 (e) Upon receiving from the Governor a bill returned by him with his objections, the
     house in which it originated shall enter the objections at large in its journal and proceed to
     reconsider it. If, upon reconsideration, on or after the third day following its return, or the
     first day of a special session convened for the sole purpose of acting on such bills,
     two-thirds of all the members of the house of origin agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent,
     together with the objections of the Governor, to the other house; and if, upon
     reconsideration, it is approved by two-thirds of all the members of the house, it shall
     become a law. In all such cases the votes of each house shall be determined by yeas and
     nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the
     journals of the respective houses.
                 (f) The Governor, in returning with his objections a bill for reconsideration at any general
     or special session of the Legislature,  may recommend that an amendment or amendments
     specified by him be made in the bill, and in such case the Legislature may amend and
     re-enact the bill. If a bill be so amended arid re-enacted, it shall be presented again to the
     Governor, but shall become a law only if he shall sign it within 10 days after presentation;
     and no bill shall be returned by the Governor a second time.
         
Amended November 3, 1981.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 086 005.0 008.0 1 NJ 1945 1981 ***
         
Article VIII, Section 5, paragraph 1

1. No lands that were formerly tidal flowed, but which have not been tidal flowed at any time for
a period of 40 years, shall be deemed riparian lands, or lands subject to a riparian claim, and the
passage of that period shall be a good and sufficient bar to any such claim, unless during that
period the State has specifically defined and asserted such a claim pursuant to law. This section
shall apply to lands which have not been tidal flowed at any time during the 40 years
immediately preceding adoption of this amendment with respect to any claim not specifically
defined and asserted by the State within 1 year of the adoption of this amendment.

Amended November 3, 1981.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 087 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1983 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3     
    
3. Any citizen and resident of this State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war or other emergency as, from time to
time, defined by the Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall he
entitled annually to a deduction from the amount of any tax bill for taxes on real and personal
property,  or both, in the sum of $50.00 or if the amount of any such tax bill shall be less than
$50.00, to a cancellation thereof, which deduction or cancellation shall not be altered or repealed.
Any person hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by the United States
Veterans= Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected disability, shall be entitled
to such further deduction from taxation as from time to time may be provided by law. The
surviving spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has met or shall meet his or her
death on active duty in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any such service shall
be entitled, during her widowhood or his widowerhood, as the case may be, and while a resident
of this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged
veterans and to such further deduction as from time to time may be provided by law. The
surviving spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has had or shall hereafter have
active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any branch of the Armed
Forces of the United States and who died or shall die while on active duty in any branch of the
Armed Forces of the United States, or who has been or may hereafter be honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service in time of war or of other emergency
as so defined in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be entitled, during her
widowhood or his widowerhood, as the case may be, and while a resident of this State, to the
deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged veterans and to
such further deductions as from time to time may be provided by law.
         
Amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 088 001.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1984 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 4

4. The Legislature may, from time to time, enact laws granting an annual deduction from the
amount of any tax bill for taxes on the real property of any citizen and resident of this State of the
age of 65 or more years, or any citizen and resident of this State less than 65 years of age who is
permanently and totally disabled according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act,
residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is a constituent part of such real property or
residing in a dwelling house owned by him which is assessed as real property but which is
situated on land owned by another or others, but no such deduction shall be in excess of $160.00
with respect to any year prior to 1981, $200.00 per year in 1981, $225.00 per year in 1982, and
$250.00 per year in 1983 and any year thereafter and such deduction shall be restricted to owners
having an income not in excess of $5,000.00 per year with respect to any year prior to 1981,
$8,000.00 per year in 1981,  $9,000.00 per year in 1982, and $10,000.00 per year in 1983 and any
year thereafter, exclusive of benefits under any one of the following:
           a. The Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and supplements thereto;
                b. Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any other federal law
     which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu of benefits referred to in, or for persons
     excluded from coverage under, a. hereof including but not limited to the Federal Railroad
     Retirement Act and federal pension, disability and retirement programs; or
                c. Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its political subdivisions, or
     agencies thereof, for persons not covered under a. hereof; provided, however, that the
     total amount of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under b. or c. hereof shall
     not be in excess of the maximum amount of benefits payable to, and allowable for
     exclusion by, an owner in similar circumstances under a, hereof.
         
The surviving spouse of a deceased citizen and resident of this State who during his or her life
received a real property tax deduction pursuant to this paragraph shall be entitled, so long as he
or
she shall remain unmarried and a resident in the same dwelling house situated on the same land
with respect to which said deduction with respect to the same real property or with respect to the
same dwelling house which is situated on land owned by another or others, notwithstanding that
said surviving spouse is under the age of 65 and is not permanently and totally disabled, provided
that said surviving spouse is 55 years of age or older.
         
   Any such deduction when so granted by law shall be granted so that it will not be in addition to
any other deduction or exemption, except a deduction granted under authority of paragraph 3 of
this section, to which the said citizen and resident may be entitled, but said citizen and resident
may receive in addition any homestead rebate or credit provided by law. The State shall annually
reimburse each taxing district in an amount equal to one-half of the tax loss to the district
resulting from the allowance of tax deductions pursuant to this paragraph.
         
Amended November 6, 1984.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 089 002.0 008.0 4 NJ 1945 1984 ***

Article VIII, Section 2, paragraph 4

 4. There shall be credited annually to a special account in the General Fund an amount
equivalent to the revenue derived from $0.025 per gallon from the tax imposed on the sale of
motor fuels pursuant to chapter 39 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes provided, however, the
dedication and use of such revenues as provided in this paragraph shall be subject and
subordinate to (a) all appropriations of revenues from such taxes made by laws previously
enacted in accordance with Article VIII, Section II, paragraph 3 of the State Constitution in order
to provide the ways and means to pay the principal and interest on bonds of the State presently
outstanding or authorized to be issued under such laws or (b) any other use of those revenues
previously enacted into law. This amount shall be appropriated from time to time by the
Legislature, only for the purposes of paying or financing the cost of planning, acquisition,
engineering, construction, reconstruction, repair and rehabilitation of the transportation system in
this State and it shall not be competent for the Legislature to borrow, appropriate or use this
amount or any part thereof for any other purpose, under any pretense whatever. The provisions of
this paragraph shall be of no effect after 17 years from the date on which this amendment
becomes part of the Constitution.
         
New.  Adopted November 6, 1984.
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 090 002.0 002.0 0 NJ 1945 1988 ***

               
Article II, Section 2. 

 All questions submitted to the people of the entire State shall be voted upon at the general
election next occurring at least 70 days following the final action of the Governor or the
Legislature, as appropriate, necessary to submit the questions.  The text of any such question
shall be published at least once in one or more newspapers of each county, if any newspapers be
published therein, at least 60 days before the election at which it is to be submitted to the people,
and the results of the vote upon a question shall be void unless the text thereof shall have been so
published.

Amended November 8, 1988.

** * MEND ***
*** MSTART 091 001.0 008.0 3 NJ 1945 1988 ***

Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph 3

3.  Any citizen and resident of this State now or hereafter honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from active service, in time of war or other emergency as, from time to
time, defined by the Legislature, in any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States shall be
entitled, annually to a deduction from the amount of any tax bill for taxes on real and personal
property, or both, including taxes attributable to a residential unit held by a stockholder in a
cooperative or mutual housing corporation, in the sum of $50.00 or if the amount of any such tax
bill shall be less than $50.00, to a cancellation thereof, which deduction or cancellation shall not
be altered or repealed.  Any person hereinabove described who has been or shall be declared by
the United States Veterans Administration, or its successor, to have a service-connected
disability, shall be entitled to such further deduction from taxation as from time to time may be
provided by law.  The surviving spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has met or
shall meet his or her death on active duty in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in
any service shall be entitled, during her widowhood or his widowerhood, as the case may be, and
while a resident of this State, to the deduction or cancellation in this paragraph provided for
honorably discharged veterans and to such further deduction as from time to time may be
provided by law.  The surviving spouse of any citizen and resident of this State who has had or
shall hereafter have active service in time of war or of other emergency as so defined in any
branch of the Armed forces of the United States and who died or shall die while on active duty in
any branch of the Armed Forces of the Unites States shall be entitled, during her widowhood or
his widowerhood, as the case may be, and while a resident of this State, to the deduction or
cancellation in this paragraph provided for honorably discharged veterans and to such further
deductions as from time to time may be provided by law.

Amended Nov. 8, 1988

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 092 007.0 004.0 2 NJ 1945 1998 ***

Article IV, Section 7, paragraph 2

2.  No gambling of any kind shall be authorized by the Legislature unless the specific kind,
restrictions and control thereof have been heretofore submitted to, and authorized by a majority
of the votes cast by, the people at a special election or shall hereafter be submitted to, and
authorized by a majority of the votes cast thereon by, the legally qualified voters of the State
voting at a general election, except that, without any such submission or authorization:
                 A.  It shall be lawful for bona tide veterans, charitable, educational, religious or fraternal
     organizations, civic and service clubs, senior citizen associations or clubs, volunteer fire
     companies and first-aid or rescue squads to conduct, under such restrictions and control
     as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Legislature by law, games of chance of,
     and restricted to, the selling of rights to participate, the awarding of prizes, in the specific
     kind of game of chance sometimes known as bingo or lotto, played with cards bearing
     numbers or other designations, 5 or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as
     objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the
     person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on such a card,
     when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
     charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the case of senior citizen
     associations or clubs to the support of such organizations, in any municipality, in which a
     majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special election as the
     submission thereof shall be prescribed by the Legislature by law, shall authorize the
     conduct of such games of chance therein;
                  A. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, bona fide veterans,
     charitable, educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, senior
     citizen associations or clubs, volunteer tire companies and first-aid or rescue squads to
     conduct games of chance of, and restricted to, the selling of tights to participate, and the
     awarding of prizes, in the specific kinds of games of chance sometimes known as raffles,
     conducted by the drawing for prizes or by the allotment of prizes by chance, when the
     entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational, charitable,
     patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, and in the case of senior citizen associations or
     clubs to the support of such organizations, in any municipality in which such law shall be
     adopted by a majority of the qualified voters, voting thereon, at a general or special
     election as the submission thereof shall be prescribed by law and for the Legislature, from
     tine to tin~, to restrict and control, by law, the conduct of such games of chance,
                  C. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize the conduct of State lotteries
     restricted to the selling of rights to participate therein and the awarding of prizes by
     drawings when the entire net proceeds of any such lottery shall be for State institutions,
     State aid for education;
     D. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize by law the establishment and
     operation, under regulation and control by the State, of gambling houses or casinos within
     the boundaries, as heretofore established, of the city of Atlantic City, county of Atlantic,
     and to license and tax such operations and equipment used in connection therewith. Any
     law authorizing the establishment and operation of such gambling establishments shall
     provide for the State revenues derived therefrom to be applied solely for the purpose of
     providing funding for reductions in property taxes, rental, telephone, gas, electric, and
     municipal utilities charges of eligible senior citizens and disabled residents of the State,
     and for additional or expanded health services or benefits or transportation services or
     benefits to eligible senior citizens and disabled residents, in accordance with such
     formulae as the Legislature shall by law provide. The type and number of such casinos or
     gambling houses and of the gambling games which may be conducted in any such
     establishment shall be determined by or pursuant to the terms of the law authorizing the
     establishment and operation thereof;
                  E. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, (1) the simultaneous
     transmission by picture of running and harness horse races conducted at racetracks
     located within or outside of this State, or both, to gambling houses or casinos in the city
     of Atlantic City and (2) the specific kind, restrictions and control of wagering at those
     gambling establishments on the results of those races. The State=s share of revenues
     derived therefrom shall be applied for services to benefit eligible senior citizens as shall
     be provided by law; and
                       F. It shall be lawful for the Legislature to authorize, by law, the specific kind,
     restrictions and control of wagering on the results of live or simulcast running and
     harness horse races conducted within or outside of this State. The State's share of
     revenues derived therefrom shall be used for such purposes as shall be provided by law.
         
Amended November 3, 1998.

*** MEND ***