This is ready to go

JW 1.03.02




*** MSTART 001 093.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1908 ***

AMENDMENT 1 RATIFIED 1908

Amendment of Section 93.
                                   
SECTION 93

State not to engage in internal improvements or lend money or credit for same; interest in private
enterprises prohibited; exception as to public roads, highways and bridges.

The state shall not engage in work of internal improvement nor lend money or its credit in aid of
such; nor shall the state be interested in any private or corporate enterprises or lend money or its
credit to any individual, association, or corporation, provided that the state may under appropriate
laws cause the net proceeds from the state convict fund to be applied to the construction, repair
and maintenance of public roads in the state and the legislature may also make additional
appropriations for that purpose.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 002 002.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1912 ***

AMENDMENT 2 RATIFIED 1912

Fees of Officers of Jefferson County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the costs, charges of courts, fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be
charged or received by any county officer of Jefferson county, including the method and basis of
their compensation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 003 000.0 019.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***

AMENDMENT 3 RATIFIED 1916

Special School Tax Amendment.

Article XIX, Section 1. The several counties in the state shall have power to levy and collect a
special county tax not exceeding thirty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable
property in such counties in addition to that now authorized or that may hereafter be authorized
for public school purposes, and in addition to that now authorized under section 260 of article
XIV of the Constitution; provided, that the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the
purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county,
and voted for by a majority of those voting at such election.

Section 2. The several school districts of any county in the state shall have power to levy and
collect a special district tax not exceeding thirty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of
taxable property in such district for public school purposes; provided, that a school district under
the meaning of this section shall include incorporated cities or towns, or any school district of
which an incorporated city or town is a part, or such other school districts now existing or
hereafter formed as may be approved by the county board of education; provided further, that the
rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted
to the vote of the qualified electors of the district and voted for by a majority of those voting at
such election; provided further, that no district tax shall be voted or collected except in such
counties as are levying and collecting not less than a three-mill special county school tax.

Section 3. The funds arising from the special county school tax levied and collected by any
county shall be apportioned and expended as the law may direct, and the funds arising from the
special school tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the county shall
be expended for the exclusive benefit of the district, as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 901 001.0 019.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***
               
[This amendment follows amendment 3 chronologically.  Amendment 3 creates a new article in
the constitution, amendments 901, 902, and 903 are the individual sections of the article.]
          
AMENDMENT 3 RATIFIED 1916

Special School Tax Amendment.

Article XIX, Section 1. The several counties in the state shall have power to levy and collect a
special county tax not exceeding thirty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable
property in such counties in addition to that now authorized or that may hereafter be authorized
for public school purposes, and in addition to that now authorized under section 260 of article
XIV of the Constitution; provided, that the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the
purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county,
and voted for by a majority of those voting at such election.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 902 002.0 019.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***
               
[This amendment follows amendment 3 chronologically.  Amendment 3 creates a new article in
the constitution, amendments 901, 902, and 903 are the individual sections of the article.]

AMENDMENT 3 RATIFIED 1916

Special School Tax Amendment.

Article XIX, Section 2. The several school districts of any county in the state shall have power to
levy and collect a special district tax not exceeding thirty cents on each one hundred dollars
worth of taxable property in such district for public school purposes; provided, that a school
district under the meaning of this section shall include incorporated cities or towns, or any school
district of which an incorporated city or town is a part, or such other school districts now existing
or hereafter formed as may be approved by the county board of education; provided further, that
the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the district and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election; provided further, that no district tax shall be voted or collected except in
such counties as are levying and collecting not less than a three-mill special county school tax.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 903 003.0 019.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***
               
[This amendment follows amendment 3 chronologically.  Amendment 3 creates a new article in
the constitution, amendments 901, 902, and 903 are the individual sections of the article.]

AMENDMENT 3 RATIFIED 1916

Special School Tax Amendment.

Article XIX, Section 3. The funds arising from the special county school tax levied and collected
by any county shall be apportioned and expended as the law may direct, and the funds arising
from the special school tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the
county shall be expended for the exclusive benefit of the district, as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 004 004.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***

AMENDMENT 4 RATIFIED 1916

Montgomery County Salary Amendment.

Commencing at the beginning of their next term of office, subsequent to the general election to
be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November, 1916, the compensation and
allowance of the following named county officers of Montgomery county shall be as follows:
Salary of judge of probate of Montgomery county, $5,000.00 per year net; allowance of
$5,500.00 per annum for office expenses, as follows: One clerk at $1,500.00 per annum; two
clerks at $1,000.00 per annum each; one clerk at $800.00 per annum, and $1,200.00 per annum
for all other expenses, including extra clerks. The said $1,200.00 to be paid to the judge of
probate in monthly installments and disbursed by him. The tax collector of Montgomery county
shall receive a salary of $4,000.00 per year net; allowance of $1,500.00 per year for his clerk in
said office, and $1,000.00 for extra help. The tax assessor of Montgomery county shall receive a
salary of $4,000.00 per year net; allowance of $1,500.00 per year for a chief clerk in said office;
$900.00 for an assistant clerk in said office and $600.00 per year for extra help. The sheriff of
Montgomery county shall receive a salary of $4,000.00 per year net; allowance of $1,200.00 per
year for a chief clerk in said office; $1,380.00 per year for a chief deputy; $2,200.00 per year for
two deputies in said office, and $1,000.00 for extra assistance. These amounts to be paid out of
the county treasury of Montgomery county. This shall not interfere with the amounts now or
hereafter allowed the sheriff for guards at the county jail or bailiffs for courts, nor with the
provisions for feeding prisoners. The sheriff shall receive amounts now provided by law, and
shall cover the same into the county treasury of Montgomery county, and the board of revenue
of Montgomery county shall pay out of the county treasury of Montgomery county the expenses
incurred by the sheriff in feeding said prisoners. The above named amounts shall be in lieu of all
compensations and allowances to the respective named officers. These amounts shall be paid out
of the county treasury of Montgomery county as the salaries of other county officers are paid. The
above named officers shall collect the fees heretofore collected by them and shall cover such
fees into the county treasury on the first Monday of each month. The board of revenue of
Montgomery county shall provide said officers with necessary quarters, books, stationery and
other conveniences. The legislature of Alabama may hereafter from time to time by local or
general laws, fix, regulate and alter the amount of the above named salaries and allowances,
including the method and basis of their compensation, also fix, regulate and alter amount of
compensation received by all other county officers of said county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 005 250.0 008.0 AL 1901 1916 ***

AMENDMENT 5 RATIFIED 1916

Repeal of Section 250.

That the Constitution of Alabama be and the same is hereby amended by repealing and striking
out of the Constitution section 250 of article 13 of the Constitution which section is as follows:
"Holders of bank notes, and depositors, who have not stipulated for interest, shall, for such notes
and deposits, be entitled in case of insolvency, to preference of payment over all other creditors,
provided this section shall apply to all banks, whether incorporated or not."

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 006 006.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1916 ***

AMENDMENT 6 RATIFIED 1916

Additional School Tax in City of Selma.

The city of Selma, in addition to the taxes it is now authorized and empowered to levy and
collect, shall levy and collect annually an additional tax of two-tenths of one per centum upon the
value of the property therein as fixed for state taxation, to be applied exclusively to the
maintenance of public schools therein, and shall levy and collect annually a further additional
tax of one-tenth of one per centum upon the value of the property therein as fixed for state
taxation, to be applied exclusively to public school buildings therein and improvements and
repairs thereon, or to the payment of indebtedness contracted for the same by the city of Selma,
or to the maintenance of public schools therein or to any one or more of these purposes; provided
that these taxes shall be in lieu of all other city taxes now required to be levied or appropriated by
the city of Selma for the support of schools or for school purposes.


*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 007 007.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1919 ***

AMENDMENT 7 REPEALED 1919

Exempting Sailors and Soldiers From The Payment of Poll Tax.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 008 008.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1919 ***

AMENDMENT 8 RATIFIED 1919

Municipal Tax Amendment.

The municipalities of Tuscumbia, Sheffield, Hurtsboro, Russellville, Lanett, Demopolis, Pell
City, Heflin, Columbiana, Carrollton, Opelika, Fairhope, Pine Hill, Scottsboro, Stevenson,
Ashland, Brewton, Pollard, Flomaton, Atmore, Inglenook, Tuskegee, Aliceville, Gordo, Reform,
Livingston, Camden, Monroeville, Phoenix and Girard, Birmingham, Bessemer, Florence,
Huntsville, Selma, Fairfield, Anniston, Athens, Jacksonville, Auburn, Carbon Hill, and Lafayette
in the state of Alabama, shall have the power and right to levy and collect a tax of one-half of one
per centum in any one year on property situated therein, based on the valuation of such property
as assessed for state taxation for the tax year ending on the 30th day of September next,
succeeding the levy; provided, that for the purpose of paying bonds issued and outstanding at the
time of the adoption of this amendment and the interest thereon, and for the purpose of paying
bonds which may be issued after the adoption of this amendment and the interest thereon, an
additional tax of one-half of one per centum may be levied and collected by said corporations;
provided further, that a majority of the qualified electors of any of said municipal corporations
voting at an election called for that purpose may vote a special tax not to exceed one-half of one
per centum in any one year for any special purpose or purposes, which tax shall be used only for
the purpose or purposes for which same is levied and collected; provided, however, that the total
tax to be levied by any of said municipal corporations shall not exceed one and one-half (1 «)
per centum in any one year. Provided, further, that the adoption of this amendment, shall in no
wise affect, limit, modify, abridge, or impair the power, authority or right of either of said
municipal corporations to levy and collect the special school taxes, now or hereafter vested in or
conferred upon them, or any of them, under the Constitution or any amendment thereto;
including the power of said city of Selma to levy and collect the taxes for schools and school
purposes vested in and conferred upon said city of Selma by the amendment to the Constitution
of Alabama adopted thereto, at the general election held in November, 1916, and which was
submitted under Law Number 315, General Laws, 1915, page 337 Amendment No. 6. Each
election held under the provisions hereof shall be ordered, held, canvassed and may be contested
in the same manner as is or may be provided by the law applicable to the municipal corporations
for elections to authorize the issuance of municipal bonds. The ballots used at such election shall
contain the words: "For excess rate of taxation for the year (or years)"and "Against excess rate of
taxation for the year (or years)" The rate of taxation proposed in excess of the rate of one (1) per
centum to be shown in the blank space provided therefor and the year or years in which the
proposed rate is to apply to be shown in the blank space provided therefor; and in the event
different excess rates are proposed for different years the words mentioned shall be repeated as
often as may be necessary to show separately the different rates proposed to be applied to the
respective years. And the voter shall record his choice, whether for or against the excess rate or
rates, shown by placing a cross mark before or after the words expressing his choice. Nothing
herein contained shall in any wise change or affect the rights of any holder of bonds of said
municipal corporations heretofore issued. Elections to authorize the levy of such special
tax may be held as often as ordered by the governing body of the municipality but when a
proposition is submitted to the electors to levy a special tax for a specific purpose, and such
proposition is defeated no second election for the same purpose shall be held in one year
thereafter.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 009 001.0 020.0 0 AL 1901 1919 ***

AMENDMENT 9 REPEALED 1919

Art. XX. To Provide for Bonds for the Construction of Roads and Highways.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 010 194.5 008.0 0 AL 1901 1922 ***

AMENDMENT 10 RATIFIED 1922

Poll Tax Exemption Amendment.

SECTION 194«  

Exemption of World War I veterans from payment of poll tax prior to October 1, 1923.

No person who honorably served in the military or naval service of the United States between
January 1, 1917, and November 11, 1918, shall be required to pay the poll tax mentioned in the
Constitution of Alabama prior to October 1, 1923; such persons shall be exempt from the
payment of all poll taxes which have or may hereafter accrue prior to October 1, 1923. This
section shall be self-executing and retroactive. The judges of probate shall issue certificates of
exemption from the payment of such poll taxes to the persons entitled thereto under such rules
and regulations as may be prescribed by the governor.

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 011 011.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1922 ***

AMENDMENT 11 RATIFIED 1922

Road Bond Issue Amendment.

Section 1. The state is authorized to engage in the construction, improvement, repair and
maintenance of public roads, highways, and bridges in the state of Alabama. To this end, and for
this purpose, the state is authorized to appropriate funds; and also to issue and sell interest-
bearing negotiable state bonds, in an amount not to exceed the sum of twenty-five
million dollars ($25,000,000.00) to be issued in such denominations, numbers, and series, and
maturing at such time, as may be provided by law; but such bonds shall bear a rate of interest not
greater than six per centum per annum, payable semi-annually, and shall be sold at a price not
less than the par value thereof. Provided, that no bonds shall be issued or sold under this
provision to such an amount that the interest thereon will exceed the net amount of vehicle
license tax collected for the year preceding the issuance of same, and which is set apart for the
payment of interest on said bonds. The state highway commission or highway department shall
locate, construct, and maintain highways and state trunk roads so as to connect each county seat
with the county seat of the adjoining county by the most direct or most feasible route, or by a
permanent road, having due regard to the public welfare, and to connect the county seats of the
several border counties at or near the state line with a public road in the border states. Provided,
that in counties which are divided into two or more judicial divisions in each of which regular
terms of circuit court are held; the places where said terms of court are held shall likewise be
connected with each other. It shall be the duty of said highway commission or highway
department to equitably apportion among the several counties the expenditure of both money and
labor and the time or times of making such investments. Not less than one-quarter of a million
dollars of the proceeds of these bonds shall be set aside and expended by the state highway
commission in each county in the state. To create a sinking fund for the prompt and faithful
payment of the principal and interest on these bonds and for the construction, maintenance, and
improvement of such public highways, roads, and bridges, the legislature shall levy a special
annual license or privilege tax on all automobiles, and on all motor driven vehicles which may be
used on the public roads and highways of this state. Such bonds when issued shall be a direct
obligation of the state, and for the prompt and faithful payment of the principal and interest
thereon the full faith and credit of the state is hereby irrevocably pledged, and such bonds shall
be exempt forever from all taxes of every kind.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 012 093.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1922 ***

AMENDMENT 12 RATIFIED 1922

Amendment of Section 93.

SECTION 93

State engaging in internal improvements or lending money or credit for same; state interest in
private or corporate enterprises; construction, maintenance, etc., of public roads, highways and
bridges and harbors and seaports.

The state shall not engage in works of internal improvement, nor lend money or its credit in aid
of such, except as may be authorized by the Constitution of Alabama or amendments thereto; nor
shall the state be interested in any private or corporate enterprise, or lend money or its credit to
any individual, association, or corporation, except as may be expressly authorized by the
Constitution of Alabama, or amendments thereto; but when authorized by laws passed by the
legislature the state may appropriate funds to be applied to the construction, repair, and
maintenance of public roads, highways and bridges in the state; and when authorized by
appropriate laws passed by the legislature the state may at a cost of not exceeding ten million
dollars engage in the work of internal improvement, or promoting, developing, constructing,
maintaining, and operating all harbors and seaports within the state or its jurisdiction, provided,
that such work or improvement shall always be and remain under the management and control of
the state, through its state harbor commission, or other governing agency. The adoption of this
amendment shall not affect in any manner any other amendment to the Constitution of Alabama
which may be adopted pursuant to any act or resolution of this session of the legislature.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 013 013.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1922 ***

AMENDMENT 13 RATIFIED 1922

Tax Rates in Jasper, Cordova, Dora, Oxford, Talladega, Citronelle, Girard, Albany and
Tuscaloosa.

The following municipal corporations, Jasper, Cordova, Dora, Oxford, Talladega, Citronelle,
Girard, Albany, and Tuscaloosa, through their respective constituted governing authorities may
levy and collect a rate of taxation on the property situated therein, not exceeding in the total in
any one year one per centum of the value of such property as assessed as provided by the
Constitution and the statutes now or hereafter enacted pursuant to the Constitution; provided that
the adoption of this amendment, shall in no wise affect, limit, modify, abridge or impair the
power, authority, or right of any of said municipal corporations to levy and collect the special
school taxes, now or hereafter vested in or conferred upon them under the Constitution or any
amendment thereto, which said special school taxes shall be in excess of said one per centum
herein provided for.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 014 194.5 008.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 14 RATIFIED 1924

Poll Tax Exemption Amendment.

SECTION 194« 

Exemption of World War I veterans from payment of poll tax.

No person who honorably served in the military or naval service of the United States between
January 1, 1917, and November 11, 1918, shall be required to pay the poll tax mentioned in the
Constitution of Alabama; such persons shall be exempt from the payment of all poll taxes which
have accrued or may hereafter accrue. This section shall be self-executing and retroactive. The
judge of probate shall issue certificates of exemption from the payment of such poll taxes to the
persons entitled thereto under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the governor.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 015 015.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 15 RATIFIED 1924

Drainage Systems, Public Roads and Seawalls.

The legislature may form or provide for the formation of districts for establishing and
maintaining a drainage system; for the building and maintaining of public roads, and for building
and maintaining a seawall or other protection against waves, storm or flood therein; and provide
for the assessment of the whole or part of the cost of such improvements against the land in such
districts to the extent of the increased value of such land by reason of the special benefits derived
from such improvements, and may provide for issuance of bonds by such district with or without
an election. Provided the provisions as to road and seawall shall apply only to Mobile and
Baldwin counties.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 016 016.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 16 RATIFIED 1924

Mobile County School Tax.

The county of Mobile, through its constituted governing authorities, may levy and collect for
public school purposes, a rate of taxation, on the property situated therein, not exceeding in the
total of any one year, one-fifth ( 1/5) of one (1) per centum of the value of such property as
assessed as provided by the Constitution of Alabama and the statutes now or hereafter
enacted pursuant to the said Constitution of Alabama, which said one-fifth ( 1/5) of one (1) per
centum shall be in addition to taxes levied and collected under and pursuant to the authority of
section 215 of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, and taxes levied and collected under and
pursuant to article XIX of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901, which article XIX was
added to said Constitution by amendment; and existing laws attempting or purporting to
authorize, empower and direct the said constituted authorities of the county of Mobile to levy and
assess such a special tax in addition to the taxes levied and collected under and pursuant to
section 215 of the Constitution as aforesaid and taxes levied and collected under and
pursuant to article XIX of the Constitution as aforesaid are hereby validated and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 017 017.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924  ***

AMENDMENT 17 RATIFIED 1924

Tax Rates in Certain Municipalities.

The municipalities of Thorsby, Piedmont, and Greenville, and Roanoke, and Greensboro and
Calera, Florala and Opp, Evergreen and Fayette, and Clayton and Clio in the state of Alabama,
shall have the power and right to levy and collect a tax of one-half of one per centum in any one
year on property situated therein, based on the valuation of such property as assessed for state
taxation for the tax year ending on the thirtieth day of September next succeeding the levy;
provided that for the purpose of paying bonds or indebtedness issued and outstanding at the time
of the adoption of this amendment and the interest thereon, for the purpose of paying bonds or
indebtedness which may be issued or incurred after the adoption of this amendment and the
interest thereon, and an additional tax of one-half of one per centum may be levied and collected
by said corporations; provided further, that a majority of the qualified electors of any of said
municipal corporations voting at an election called for that purpose may vote a special tax not to
exceed one-half of one per centum in any one year for any special purpose or purposes, which tax
shall be used only for the purpose or purposes for which same is levied and collected; provided,
however, that the total tax to be levied by any of said municipal corporations shall not exceed
one and one-half (1« ) per centum in any one year. Alabama City shall have the power and right
to levy and collect a tax of three-quarters of one per centum in any one year on property situated
therein, based on the valuation of such property as assessed for state taxation. Provided, further,
that the adoption of this amendment shall in no wise affect, limit, modify, abridge or impair the
power, or authority or right of either of said municipal corporations to levy and collect the special
school taxes, now or hereafter vested in or conferred upon them, or any of them, under the
Constitution or any amendment thereto; including the power of the city of Selma to levy and
collect the taxes for schools and school purposes vested in and conferred upon said city of Selma
by the amendment to the Constitution of Alabama adopted thereto at the general election
held in November, 1916, and which was submitted under Law Number 315, General Laws 1915,
page 337 Amendment No. 6, each election held under the provisions hereof shall be ordered,
held, canvassed and may be contested in the same manner as is or may be provided by the law
applicable to the municipal corporations for electionsto authorize the issuance of municipal
bonds. The ballots used at such election shall contain the words: "For .... excess rate
of taxation for the year (or years) ....;" and "Against .... excess rate of taxation for the year (or
years) ....." The rate of taxation proposed in excess of the rate of one (1) per centum to be shown
in the blank space provided therefor and the year or years in which the proposed rate is to apply
to be shown in the blank spaces provided therefor; and in the event different excess rates are
proposed for different years the words mentioned shall be repeated as often as may be necessary
to show separately the different rates proposed to be applied to the respective years. And the
voter shall record his choice, whether for or against the excess rate or rates shown by placing a
cross mark before or after the words expressing his choice. Nothing herein contained shall in any
wise change or affect the rights of any holder of bonds of municipal corporations heretofore
issued. Elections to authorize the levy of such special tax may be held as often as ordered by the
governing body of the municipality but when a proposition is submitted to the electors to levy a
special tax for a specific purpose, and such proposition is defeated no second election for the
same shall be held in one year thereafter.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 018 018.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 18 RATIFIED 1924

Mobile County Road Bonds.

Mobile county may become indebted and may issue bonds for the construction or improvement
of concrete or better than concrete surfaced public roads, and concrete or better than concrete
public bridges in said county, and for the construction of bridges and roadway necessary to
provide a public road for vehicular travel between the highlands of Mobile and Baldwin counties,
in an amount not to exceed six and one-half per centum of the assessed value of the property
situated in Mobile county. To pay said indebtedness and interest thereon, Mobile county may
levy and collect an annual tax on said property not to exceed one-half of one per centum of said
value. The indebtedness, the bonds and the tax authorized hereby shall be in addition to those
authorized by the Constitution of Alabama prior to the adoption of this amendment. But no such
additional indebtedness shall be created, and no such additional bonds shall be issued, and no
such additional tax shall be levied, until each improvement or construction proposed to be built
thereby, its approximate location, estimated cost and time of completion, and the amount of the
proposed increase, shall have been determined upon and made public by the board of revenue
and road commissioners of Mobile county, and the proposed increase of indebtedness or issue of
bonds or tax therefor shall have been first authorized by a majority vote by ballot of the qualified
voters of Mobile county voting upon such proposition.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 019 019.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 19 RATIFIED 1924

Walker County Special Road Tax.

Section 1. The county of Walker, state of Alabama, shall have power to levy and collect a special
road tax not exceeding fifty cents on each hundred dollars worth of taxable property in said
county in addition to that now authorized or that may hereafter be authorized for the erection,
construction or maintenance of the necessary public roads, bridges or ferries and in addition to
that now authorized under section 215 of article XI of the Constitution, which special county tax
so levied and collected shall be applied exclusively to the purpose for which the same was so
levied and collected, provided, that the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose
thereof shall have first been submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county, and
voted for by a majority of those voting at such election.

Section 2. Twenty-five per centum of all moneys derived from property lying within the
municipalities and arising from the tax proposed herein shall be paid to such municipality and
shall, by it, be expended for upkeep of its streets.

Section 3. The court of county commissioners, boards of revenue, or other governing body of
said county may, or upon written petition of ten per centum of the qualified voters of Walker
county, shall call and submit said election provided for and authorized by section 1 hereof to the
qualified electors of Walker county either at the time of the general election or at a
special election called for that purpose; provided, that said election shall be called and held in
accordance with the law now or that may be enacted governing county bond elections, and in
conformity with the general election laws of the state.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 020 020.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1924 ***

AMENDMENT 20 RATIFIED 1924

Tax Elections in Certain School Districts in Lawrence County.

Town Creek school district No. 59, Landersville school district No. 23, and Moulton school
district No. 28, in Lawrence county, Alabama, shall each have the right and power by vote of a
majority of the qualified electors of such district at an election held for that purpose to levy and
collect for the purpose of acquiring, constructing or repairing of school buildings in such districts
or paying for school buildings already built, a tax of not over five mills in any one year, in
addition to all other taxes now authorized by law. The election in such district to determine
whether or not such tax shall be levied shall be called, held and conducted as now provided by
law for calling, holding and conducting of elections to determine whether or not a three-mill
district school tax shall be levied and collected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 021 000.0 020.A 0 AL 1901 1927 ***

AMENDMENT 21 RATIFIED 1927

Art. XXA. State Roads, Highways and Bridges- Bond Issue.

The state is authorized to engage in the construction, improvement, repair and maintenance of
public roads, highways and bridges in the state of Alabama. To this end and for this purpose the
state is authorized to appropriate funds, and also to issue and sell interest-bearing negotiable state
bonds in addition to those already authorized and sold under article XX, as an amendment to the
Constitution of 1901, in an amount not to exceed the sum of twenty-five million dollars
($25,000,000.00); to be issued in such denominations, numbers and series, and maturing at such
times as may be provided by law; all such bonds shall bear a rate of interest not greater than six
per cent per annum, payable semi-annually, and shall be sold at a price not less than the par value
thereof. The state highway commission or highway department shall locate, construct and
maintain highways and state trunk roads so as to connect each county seat with the county seat of
the adjoining county by the most direct or feasible route or by a permanent road, having due
regard to the public welfare; and to connect the county seats of the several border counties at or
near the state line with a public road in the border state. Provided that in counties which are
divided into two or more judicial divisions in each of which regular terms of the circuit court are
held, the places where said terms of court are held, shall likewise be connected with each other. It
shall be the duty of the highway commission or highway department to equitably apportion
among the several counties of the state the expenditure of both money and labor and the time or
times of making such investment. Not less than one-quarter of a million dollars of the proceeds
of these bonds shall be set aside and expended by the state highway commission in each county
in the state. To create a sinking fund for the prompt and faithful payment of the principal and
interest on these bonds and for the construction, maintenance and improvement of such public
highways, roads and bridges, the legislature shall levy an excise tax, in addition to the levy made
February 10, 1923, of two cents per gallon upon gasoline or any substitute therefor, or an
adequate license or excise tax on any other motive power used to propel auto vehicles. Such
bonds when issued shall be a direct obligation of the state and for the prompt and faithful
payment of the principal and the interest thereon the full faith and credit of the state is hereby
irrevocably pledged and such bonds shall be exempt forever from taxes of every kind.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 022 022.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1928 ***

AMENDMENT 22 RATIFIED 1928

Drainage Districts.

Section 1. The legislature may form or provide for the formation of drainage districts for
establishing and maintaining drainage systems; and provide for the assessment of the whole or
part of the cost of such improvements against the lands and property in such district to the extent
of the increased value thereof by reason of special benefits derived from such improvements and
may provide for the issuance of bonds for such districts with or without an election.

Section 2. This amendment shall be retroactive and retrospective and shall operate to ratify,
confirm and validate the act of the legislature of Alabama, which act provided for the drainage of
farm, wet, swamp and overflow lands in the state of Alabama and authorized the organization of
drainage districts, conferred the right of eminent domain to the extent necessary to carry out the
purpose of said act and provided for raising of revenues by bond issue or otherwise to pay the
cost and expense of installing and maintaining drainage systems so as to promote the public
health and general welfare and, which act was approved March 4, 1915; and this amendment
shall operate to confirm and validate all corporate organizations under authority of such law, all
procedure had, all acts done, all bonds issued, contracts entered into and assessments made by
such corporations under authority of such law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 023 219.0 011.0 0 AL 1901 1931 ***


AMENDMENT 23 RATIFIED 1931

Repeal of Section 219; Inheritance and Estate Taxes.

Article XXI. Section 219 of the present Constitution is hereby annulled and set aside and
hereafter the legislature of Alabama may provide for the assessment, levy and collection of a tax
upon inheritances and for the levying of estate taxes not to exceed in the aggregate the amounts
which may by any law of the United States be allowed to be credited against or deducted from
any similar tax upon inheritances or taxes on estates assessed or levied by the United States on
the same subject. The legislature shall have the power to levy such inheritance or estate taxes in
the state of Alabama only so long as and during the time an inheritance or estate tax is enforced
by the United States against Alabama inheritances or estate, and shall only be exercised or
enforced to the extent of absorbing the amount of any deduction or credit which may be
permitted by the laws of the United States now existing or hereafter enacted to be claimed by
reason thereof as deduction or credit against such similar tax of the United States applicable to
Alabama inheritances or estates.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 904 001.0 021.0 0 AL 1901 1931 ***


AMENDMENT 23 RATIFIED 1931

Repeal of Section 219; Inheritance and Estate Taxes.

[Note that this amendment repeals old section 219, and establishes a new article 21.]

Article XXI. Section 219 of the present Constitution is hereby annulled and set aside and
hereafter the legislature of Alabama may provide for the assessment, levy and collection of a tax
upon inheritances and for the levying of estate taxes not to exceed in the aggregate the amounts
which may by any law of the United States be allowed to be credited against or deducted from
any similar tax upon inheritances or taxes on estates assessed or levied by the United States on
the same subject. The legislature shall have the power to levy such inheritance or estate taxes in
the state of Alabama only so long as and during the time an inheritance or estate tax is enforced
by the United States against Alabama inheritances or estate, and shall only be exercised or
enforced to the extent of absorbing the amount of any deduction or credit which may be
permitted by the laws of the United States now existing or hereafter enacted to be claimed by
reason thereof as deduction or credit against such similar tax of the United States applicable to
Alabama inheritances or estates.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 024 284.0 018.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

AMENDMENT 24 RATIFIED 1933

Amendment of Section 284.

SECTION 284

Manner of proposing amendments; submission of amendments to electors; election on
amendments; proclamation of result of election; basis of representation in legislature not to be
changed by amendment. Amendments may be proposed to this Constitution by the legislature in
the manner following: The proposed amendments shall be read in the house in which they
originate on three several days, and, if upon the third reading three-fifths of all the members
elected to that house shall vote in favor thereof, the proposed amendments shall be sent to the
other house, in which they shall likewise be read on three several days, and if upon the third
reading three-fifths of all of the members elected to that house shall vote in favor of the proposed
amendments, the legislature shall order an election by the qualified electors of the state upon
such proposed amendments, to be held either at the general election next succeeding the session
of the legislature at which the amendments are proposed or upon another day appointed by the
legislature, not less than three months after the final adjournment of the session of the legislature
at which the amendments were proposed. Notice of such election, together with the proposed
amendments, shall be given by proclamation of the governor, which shall be published in every
county in such manner as the legislature shall direct, for at least four successive weeks next
preceding the day appointed for such election. On the day so appointed an election shall be held
for the vote of the qualified electors of the state upon the proposed amendments. If such election
be held on the day of the general election, the officers of such general election shall open a poll
for the vote of the qualified electors upon the proposed amendments; if it be held on a day other
than that of the general election, officers for such election shall be appointed; and the election
shall be held in all things in accordance with the law governing general elections. In all elections
upon such proposed amendments, the votes cast thereat shall be canvassed, tabulated and returns
thereof be made to the secretary of state, and counted, in the same manner as in elections for
representatives in the legislature; and if it shall thereupon appear that a majority of the qualified
electors who voted at such election upon the proposed amendments voted in favor of the same,
such amendments shall be valid to all intents and purposes as parts of this Constitution. The
result of such election shall be made known by proclamation of the governor. Representation in
the legislature shall be based upon population, and such basis of representation shall not be
changed by constitutional amendments.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 025 000.0 022.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

AMENDMENT 25 RATIFIED 1933

Income Taxes.

Article XXII. The legislature shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for state purposes on
net incomes from whatever source derived within this state, including the incomes derived from
salaries, fees and compensation paid from the state, county, municipality, and any agency or
creature thereof, for the calendar year, 1933, and thereafter and to designate and define the
incomes to be taxed and to fix the rates of taxes, provided that the rate shall not exceed 5 percent
nor 3 percent on corporations. Income shall not be deemed property for purposes of ad valorem
taxes. From net income an exemption of not less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be
allowed to unmarried persons and an exemption of not less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) shall be allowed to the head of a family, provided that only one exemption
shall be allowed to husband and wife where they are living together and make separate returns
for income tax. An exemption of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be allowed
for each dependent member of the family of an income tax payer under the age of 18 years. The
legislature shall reduce the ad valorem tax from time to time when and to such an amount as the
revenue derived from the income tax will justify. In the event the legislature levies an
income tax, such tax must be levied upon the salaries, income, fees, or other compensation of
state, county and municipal officers and employees, on the same basis as such income taxes are
levied upon other persons. All income derived from such tax shall be held in trust for the
payment of the floating debt of Alabama until all debts due on Oct. 1st, 1932, are paid and
thereafter used exclusively for the reduction of state ad valorem taxes.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 905 001.0 022.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

AMENDMENT 25 RATIFIED 1933

Income Taxes.

Article XXII. The legislature shall have the power to levy and collect taxes for state purposes on
net incomes from whatever source derived within this state, including the incomes derived from
salaries, fees and compensation paid from the state, county, municipality, and any agency or
creature thereof, for the calendar year, 1933, and thereafter and to designate and define the
incomes to be taxed and to fix the rates of taxes, provided that the rate shall not exceed 5 percent
nor 3 percent on corporations. Income shall not be deemed property for purposes of ad valorem
taxes. From net income an exemption of not less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be
allowed to unmarried persons and an exemption of not less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) shall be allowed to the head of a family, provided that only one exemption
shall be allowed to husband and wife where they are living together and make separate returns
for income tax. An exemption of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be allowed
for each dependent member of the family of an income tax payer under the age of 18 years. The
legislature shall reduce the ad valorem tax from time to time when and to such an amount as the
revenue derived from the income tax will justify. In the event the legislature levies an
income tax, such tax must be levied upon the salaries, income, fees, or other compensation of
state, county and municipal officers and employees, on the same basis as such income taxes are
levied upon other persons. All income derived from such tax shall be held in trust for the
payment of the floating debt of Alabama until all debts due on Oct. 1st, 1932, are paid and
thereafter used exclusively for the reduction of state ad valorem taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 026 213.0 012.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

AMENDMENT 26 RATIFIED 1933

Amendment of Section 213.

SECTION 213

Creation of state debt after ratification of Constitution; temporary loans; refunding bonds for
existing indebtedness; payment of interest on certain outstanding and unpaid state warrants;
sinking fund for payment of floating indebtedness; warrants not to be drawn on state treasury
unless money available for payment; unpaid appropriations for which money unavailable at end
of fiscal year.
After the ratification of this Constitution, no new debt shall be created against, or incurred by the
state, or its authority except to repel invasion or suppress insurrection, and then only by a
concurrence of two-thirds of the members of each house of the legislature, and the vote shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered on the journals; provided, the governor may be authorized to
negotiate temporary loans, never to exceed three hundred thousand dollars, to meet the
deficiencies in the treasury, and until the same is paid no new loan shall be negotiated; (provided,
further, that this section shall not be so construed as to prevent the issuance of bonds for the
purpose of refunding the existing bonded indebtedness of the state. Provided, further, that this
section shall not be construed as to prevent the governor from paying interest at the rate of not
exceeding 5% per annum payable semi-annually from July 1, 1933, on the floating indebtedness
of the state at the close of business on September 30, 1932, as shown by outstanding and unpaid
warrants drawn on the treasury, as provided by law, amounting in the aggregate to
$16,943,357.12 and items enumerated in an act of the legislature number 294, being senate bill
272, approved November 9, 1932 [Acts 1932, Ex. Sess., p. 298], all of which are hereby ratified
and confirmed.) All warrants and/or instruments issued or to be issued representing such
indebtedness shall be a direct obligation of the state, and for the prompt and faithful payment of
the principal and interest thereon, the full faith and credit of the state is hereby irrevocably
pledged, and such warrants and/or instruments shall be exempt forever from all taxes of every
kind. Any act creating or incurring any new debt against the state, except as herein provided for,
shall be absolutely void. To create a sinking fund for the prompt and faithful payment of the
floating indebtedness of the state, and interest thereon, the net proceeds of any income tax which
may be levied by the legislature pursuant to law is hereby pledged. To prevent further deficits in
the state treasury, it shall be unlawful from and after the adoption of this amendment for the state
comptroller of the state of Alabama to draw any warrant or other order for the payment of money
belonging to, or administered by, the state of Alabama upon the state treasurer, unless there is in
the hand of such treasurer money appropriated and available for the full payment of the same. In
case there is, at the end of any fiscal year, insufficient money in the state treasury for the payment
of all proper claims presented to the state comptroller for the issuance of warrants, the
comptroller shall issue warrants for that proportion of each such claim which the money
available for the payment of all said claims bears to the whole, and such warrants for such
prorated sums shall thereupon be paid by the state treasurer. At the end of each fiscal year all
unpaid appropriations which exceed the amount of money in the state treasury subject to the
payment of the same after the proration above provided for, shall thereupon become null and
void to the extent of such excess. Any person violating any of the provisions of this amendment
shall, on conviction, be punished by a fine of not exceeding five thousand dollars, or by
imprisonment in the penitentiary for not more than two years, one or both, at the discretion of the
jury trying the same, and the violation of any provisions of this amendment shall also be ground
for impeachment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 906 000.0 024.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

[note that this amendment follows amendment 26 chronologically]

AMENDMENT 26A RATIFIED 1933

Suspension of Restriction on Diminishing Public Salaries, etc.

Article XXIV. All provisions of the Constitution which prohibit or restrict the legislature from
decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensations of any executive, legislative or
judicial officer or of any public officer or of any officer holding any civil office of profit under
this state or any county or municipality thereof, whether elected or appointed, during the term for
which he shall have been elected or appointed are hereby suspended until October 1, 1935.
Provided that from and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of the ratification
and adoption of this amendment no salary, compensation, fees or commissions paid to any officer
under the state or any county or municipality thereof, shall exceed the sum of six thousand
dollars per annum. Said limitation of $6,000.00 to be inoperative after October 1, 1935. Any act
of the legislature heretofore adopted decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation
of any such officer or officers, and which by its terms is to become effective after the expiration
of the present term of any such officer or officers, shall, by virtue hereof, become effective from
and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of the ratification and adoption of
this amendment; provided, however, that should the legislature adopt any other act or acts
decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of any such officer or officers during
the term for which such officer or officers may have been elected or appointed in a larger
amount, such subsequent act or acts shall control. Any other act of the legislature adopted prior
to October 1, 1935, decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of any such
officer or officers, during the term for which such officer or officers may have been elected or
appointed, shall be effective from and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of
the ratification and adoption of this amendment, or from and after the adoption by the legislature
of any such act decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of such officer or
officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 907 001.0 024.0 0 AL 1901 1933 ***

[note that this amendment follows amendment 26 chronologically]

AMENDMENT 26A RATIFIED 1933

Suspension of Restriction on Diminishing Public Salaries, etc.

Article XXIV. All provisions of the Constitution which prohibit or restrict the legislature from
decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensations of any executive, legislative or
judicial officer or of any public officer or of any officer holding any civil office of profit under
this state or any county or municipality thereof, whether elected or appointed, during the term for
which he shall have been elected or appointed are hereby suspended until October 1, 1935.
Provided that from and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of the ratification
and adoption of this amendment no salary, compensation, fees or commissions paid to any officer
under the state or any county or municipality thereof, shall exceed the sum of six thousand
dollars per annum. Said limitation of $6,000.00 to be inoperative after October 1, 1935. Any act
of the legislature heretofore adopted decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation
of any such officer or officers, and which by its terms is to become effective after the expiration
of the present term of any such officer or officers, shall, by virtue hereof, become effective from
and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of the ratification and adoption of
this amendment; provided, however, that should the legislature adopt any other act or acts
decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of any such officer or officers during
the term for which such officer or officers may have been elected or appointed in a larger
amount, such subsequent act or acts shall control. Any other act of the legislature adopted prior
to October 1, 1935, decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of any such
officer or officers, during the term for which such officer or officers may have been elected or
appointed, shall be effective from and after the first day of the month next succeeding the date of
the ratification and adoption of this amendment, or from and after the adoption by the legislature
of any such act decreasing or diminishing the salary, fees or compensation of such officer or
officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 027 229.0 012.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 27 RATIFIED 1935

Amendment of Section 229.

SECTION 229

Special laws conferring corporate powers prohibited; general law as to grant or amendment of
corporate charters; corporation franchise taxes to be paid; exemption of benevolent, educational
or religious corporations and federal building and loan associations from franchise taxes.

The legislature shall pass no special act conferring corporate powers, but it shall pass general
laws under which corporations may be organized and corporate powers obtained, subject,
nevertheless, to repeal at the will of the legislature; and shall pass general laws under which
charters may be altered or amended. The legislature shall, by general laws, provide for the
payment to the state of Alabama of a franchise tax by corporations organized under the laws of
this state which shall be in proportion to the amount of capital stock; but strictly benevolent,
educational or religious corporations or federal building and loan associations organized pursuant
to an act of congress known as the Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, as amended, and as the
same may hereafter be amended, or building and loan associations organized under or authorized
to do business by the laws of Alabama shall not be required to pay such a tax on their
withdrawable or repurchasable shares. The charter of any corporation shall be subject to
amendment, alteration, or repeal under general laws. Exemption of the shares of building and
loan associations from franchise taxes heretofore provided by statute is ratified.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 028 028.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 28 RATIFIED 1935

Costs, Fees, Salaries, etc., of Certain Officers in Mobile County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter from time to time by general or local laws, but subject
to the provisions of section 281 of the Constitution of Alabama, fix, regulate and alter the costs,
charges of court, fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be charged or received by the
following county officers of Mobile county, Alabama, being, the judge of probate, the tax
assessor, the tax collector, the clerk of the circuit court, and the register of the circuit court,
including the method and basis of the compensation of such officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 029 029.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 29 RATIFIED 1935

Mobile County Bonds.

The legislature of Alabama may authorize Mobile county to issue bonds from time to time, not
exceeding in the aggregate $1,600,000.00, which bonds, or the proceeds thereof, shall be used
exclusively for paying valid and enforceable unbonded obligations of Mobile county, and
unbonded obligations of Mobile county which would be valid and enforceable but for the
provision or provisions of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 fixing the debt limit of said
county, and all past due interest and principal on any valid and enforceable bonded obligations of
said county, existing on September 30th, 1936. In September of each year after the adoption of
this amendment to the Constitution, the governing body of Mobile county shall adopt a budget
based on 95 percent of the gross receipts of the general fund of the preceding year for the
succeeding fiscal year beginning October 1st, and the expenses of such county for any such fiscal
year shall not exceed the revenues of the county for that year. All debts contracted or liabilities
incurred by the said county in excess of such revenues shall be void. The governing body of
Mobile county may, during any such fiscal year, borrow additional money to the extent
of twenty-five (25%) percent of the general revenues of such county for the preceding fiscal year,
and pledge to secure the payment thereof the general revenues of the county for such current
fiscal year only, such loans to be paid within that fiscal year or from the pledged general revenues
of the county subsequently collected for that year, and any loan so made and not
paid out of the general revenues of the county pledged to secure the same shall be void as to any
amount remaining unpaid. The legislature shall not, after the adoption of this amendment, pass
any law making any claim a preferred claim against said county, and all laws, or parts of laws,
now in force and effect, making a claim a preferred claim against said county, are hereby
annulled as to any future claim. The words "governing body of Mobile county" as herein used
shall include any board or officer which is now or which may hereafter be vested with the powers
and duties now or formerly exercised by the board of revenue and road commissioners of Mobile
county, Alabama. Any person violating any of the provisions of this amendment shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $5,000.00, or by imprisonment in the
penitentiary for not more than two years, one or both, at the discretion of the jury trying the same,
and the violation of any of the provisions of this amendment shall also be ground for
impeachment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 030 030.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 30 RATIFIED 1935

Lawrence County Bonds.

Lawrence county may become indebted and may issue bonds therefor in an amount not
exceeding $130,000 in addition to that now authorized, for the construction of and equipping of a
courthouse in said county. To pay said indebtedness, and interest thereon, Lawrence county may
levy and collect an annual tax on all property situated therein at a rate not in excess of 3 mills.
The indebtedness, the bonds and the tax authorized hereby shall be in addition to those
authorized prior to the adoption of this amendment. But no such additional indebtedness shall be
incurred, no such bonds shall be issued and no such tax shall be levied until the estimated cost of
the construction and equipping of said courthouse hereby proposed to be built, its time of
completion, and the amount of the increased indebtedness, the rate of interest to be paid thereon,
and the period over which the bonds to be issued will be refunded, shall have been determined
upon and made public by the county governing body of said county; and the proposed increase in
indebtedness and the issuance of bonds and the increase in rate of taxation first shall have been
authorized by a majority of the qualified electors of said county voting upon such proposal at an
election to be called by said county governing body for said purposes to be held not less than
sixty (60) nor more than (120) one hundred twenty days after the adoption of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 031 031.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 31 RATIFIED 1935

Taxation in Municipality of Attalla.

(a) The municipality of Attalla, Alabama, through its governing body, may levy and collect from
and after the date of this amendment the present rate of one percent ad valorem tax per annum,
and said amount to be devoted to the payment of outstanding bonds, provide for schools, and
such other purposes as may be designated by the governing body of said municipality, but before
any additional tax now authorized by law can be levied, it must be voted by a majority of
qualified electors of the municipality voting on such proposition at an election called by the
governing body of said municipality for such purposes; providing that the total tax levied for all
purposes by the said municipality of Attalla shall not exceed one per centum in any one year on
the property situated therein, based on the valuation of such property as assessed for state
taxation. (b) The adoption of this amendment shall in no wise effect, limit, modify, abridge or
impair the power, authority or right of such municipality to levy and collect the special school
taxes now or hereafter vested in or conferred upon it under the Constitution or any amendment
thereto. (c) Each election held under the provisions of this amendment shall be ordered, held,
canvassed and may be contested in the same manner as is or may be provided by the law
applicable to municipal corporations, for elections to order the issuance of municipal bonds. The
ballots used at such election shall contain the following words: "For authorization of a
continuation of taxation at a rate not to exceed one percent per annum for the purpose of the
payment of outstanding bonds, provide for schools, and such other purposes as may be
designated by the governing body of said municipality." "Against authorization of a continuation
of taxation at a rate not to exceed one percent per annum for the purpose of the payment of
outstanding bonds, provide for schools, and such other purposes as may be designated by the
governing body of said municipality." The rate of taxation proposed shall be printed upon the
ballot in the space indicated therefor and for the year or years in which the proposed rate is to
apply, and the purpose or purposes for which said tax is to be used shall likewise be placed in the
respective places therefor. The voter shall record his choice either for or against authorization of
the proposed rate for the proposed purpose or purposes by placing a cross mark before or after
the words expressing his choice. Nothing herein contained shall in any wise change or effect the
rights of any holder of bonds of said municipal corporations heretofore issued. Elections in said
municipality to order the levy of such tax may be held as often as ordered by the governing body
thereof, but when a proposition is submitted to the said municipality hereunder and such
proposition is defeated, no second election shall be held in such municipality for one year
thereafter. This amendment shall be self-operative without any additional legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 032 032.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 32 RATIFIED 1935

Tax Elections in Certain School Districts in Lawrence County.

Enon school district, Hendon school district, Oakville school district, Cave Springs school
district, Center school district, Piney Grove school district, Shiloh school district and Speake
school district in Lawrence county, Alabama, shall each have the right and power by vote of a
majority of the qualified electors of such district at an election held for that purpose to levy and
collect for the purpose of, acquiring, constructing or repairing of school buildings in such
districts or paying for school buildings already built, a tax of not over three mills in any one year,
in addition to all other taxes now authorized by law. The election in such district to determine
whether or not such tax shall be levied shall be called, held and, conducted as now provided by
law for calling, holding and conducting of election to determine whether or not a three mill
district school tax shall be levied and collected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 033 033.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1935 ***

AMENDMENT 33 RATIFIED 1935

Regulation of Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Calhoun and Tuscaloosa Counties.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries, including the method or basis
of their compensation, to be charged or received by the tax assessors, tax collectors, probate
judges, circuit clerks, sheriffs, and registers of the chancery courts, and including the right to
place any one or all of said officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged and collected by
said officers to be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid, and provide the
method and basis of their compensation, or consolidate any of said offices in the following
named counties: Calhoun and Tuscaloosa. All acts of the regular session of the legislature 1935
heretofore passed and applicable, or purporting to be applicable, to any or all of said counties,
and fixing, or purporting to fix the compensation of said named county officers, on a salary basis,
are hereby validated and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 034 034.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1938 ***

AMENDMENT 34 RATIFIED 1938

Tax for Malaria Control in Limestone County.

The governing body of Limestone county must levy and collect for use in the control of malaria,
in addition to all other taxes now authorized by law, a tax not in excess of one mill on all
property situated within the county, based upon the valuation of such property in said county, as
assessed for state taxation, provided such tax is authorized by a majority of the qualified electors
of said county voting upon such proposition at an election called and held for the purpose of
authorizing such tax. Such an election may be called at any time by the governing body of said
county and shall be held and conducted and the results canvassed as now provided by law for
holding and conducting and canvassing the returns of an election. The proceeds of the tax hereby
authorized shall be used exclusively for the control of malaria and shall be expended through the
proper fiscal agencies of the county government under the direction of the governing body of
Limestone county and the Limestone county department of public health.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 035 138.0 005.0 0 AL 1901 1938 ***

AMENDMENT 35 RATIFIED 1938

Amendment of Section 138.

SECTION 138

Election and term of office of sheriffs; sheriff eligible to succeed self; impeachment of sheriff;
effect of impeachment of sheriff.

A sheriff shall be elected in each county by the qualified electors thereof who shall hold office
for a term of four years unless sooner removed, and he shall be eligible to such office as his own
successor. Whenever any prisoner is taken from jail, or from the custody of any sheriff or his
deputy, and put to death, or suffers grievous; bodily harm, owing to the neglect, connivance,
cowardice, or other grave fault of the sheriff, such sheriff may be impeached, under section 174
of this Constitution. If the sheriff be impeached, and thereupon convicted, he shall not be eligible
to hold any office in this state during the time for which he had been elected or appointed to
serve as sheriff.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 036 036.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1938 ***

AMENDMENT 36 RATIFIED 1938

Bonds for Erection, etc., of Jail in Morgan County.

Morgan county may become indebted and may issue bonds therefor in an amount not exceeding
$115,000.00 in addition to that now authorized, for the acquiring and paying for additional real
property adjoining that where the court house and jail now set and constructing and equipping a
jail building in said county. To pay said indebtedness and interest thereon, Morgan county may
levy and collect an annual tax on all property situated therein at a rate not in excess of one mill.
The indebtedness, the bonds and the tax authorized hereby shall be in addition to those
authorized prior to the adoption of this amendment. But no such additional indebtedness shall be
incurred, no such bonds shall be issued and no such tax shall be levied until the estimated cost of
acquiring and paying for additional real property adjoining that where the court house and jail
now set and the cost of the construction and equipping of said jail building in said county hereby
proposed to be built, its time of completion, the amount of the increased indebtedness, the rate of
interest to be paid thereon and the period over which the bonds to be issued will be refunded,
shall have been determined upon and made public by the county governing body of said county;
and the proposed increase in indebtedness and the issuance of bonds and the increase in rate of
taxation first shall have been authorized by a majority of the qualified electors of said county
voting upon such proposal at an election to be called by said county governing body for said
purpose to be held not less than sixty nor more than ninety days after the adoption of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 037 008.0 001.0 0 AL 1901 1939 ***

AMENDMENT 37 RATIFIED 1939

Amendment of Section 8.

SECTION 8

Proceeding against person by information; grand jury not required in misdemeanor cases; plea of
guilty prior to indictment.

No person shall for any indictable offense be proceeded against criminally by information, except
in cases arising in the militia and volunteer forces when in actual service, or when assembled
under arms as a military organization, or, by leave of the court, for misfeasance, misdemeanor,
extortion and oppression in office, otherwise than is provided in the Constitution; provided, that
in cases of misdemeanor, the legislature may by law dispense with a grand jury and authorize
such prosecutions and proceedings before justices of the peace or such other inferior courts as
may be by law established. Provided further that in all felony cases, except those punishable by
capital punishment, the legislature may by law dispense with a grand jury and authorize such
prosecutions and proceedings in such manner as may be provided by law if the defendant, after
having had the advice of counsel of his choice or in the event he is unable to employ counsel, the
advice of counsel which must be appointed by the court, makes known in open court to a judge
of a court having jurisdiction of the offense that he desires to plead guilty, provided, however, the
defendant cannot plead guilty within fifteen days after his 
arrest.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 038 124.0 005.0 0 AL 1901 1939 ***

AMENDMENT 38 RATIFIED 1939

Amendment of Section 124.

SECTION 124

Authority of governor to grant reprieves and commutations to persons under sentence of death;
legislature to regulate administration of pardons, paroles, remission of fines and forfeitures,
suspension of sentences and probation; pardon not relief from civil and political disabilities
unless specifically provided.

The governor shall have power to grant reprieves and commutations to persons under sentence of
death. The legislature shall have power to provide for and to regulate the administration of
pardons, paroles, remission of fines and forfeitures, and may authorize the courts having criminal
jurisdiction to suspend sentence and to order probation. No pardon shall relieve from civil and
political disabilities unless specifically expressed in the pardon.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 039 039.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1939 ***

AMENDMENT 39 RATIFIED 1939

Time and Place of Meetings of Legislature; Biennial Sessions; Organizational Sessions; Election
of President Pro Tempore of Senate and Speaker of House of Representatives; Maximum Length
of Sessions; Compensation and Travel Allowances of Meals.

All sessions of the legislature shall be held at the capitol in the senate chamber and in the hall of
the house of representatives; unless at any time it should from any cause become impossible or
dangerous for the legislature to meet or remain at the capitol or for the senate to meet or remain
in the senate chamber, or for the representatives to meet or remain in the hall of the house of
representatives, in which case the governor may convene the legislature, or remove it after it has
convened, to some other place, or may designate some other place for the sitting of the respective
houses, or either of them, as necessity may require. The legislature shall convene on the second
Tuesday in January next succeeding their election and shall remain in session for not longer than
ten consecutive calendar days. No business can be transacted at such sessions except the
organization of the legislature, the election of officers and the appointment of standing
committees of the senate and the house of representatives for the ensuing four years, which
election and appointment may, however, also be made at such other times as may be necessary,
the opening and publication of the returns and the ascertainment and declaration of the
results of the election for governor, lieutenant-governor, attorney-general, state auditor, secretary
of state, state treasurer, superintendent of education and commissioner of agriculture and
industries, the election of such officers in the event of a tie vote, the determination of contested
elections for such offices, the judging of the election returns and qualification of the
members of the legislature, and the inauguration of the governor and the other elected state
officers whose terms of office are concurrent with that of the governor. At the beginning of each
such organization session, and at such other times as may be necessary, the senate shall elect one
of its members president pro tempore thereof, to preside over its deliberations in the
absence of the lieutenant-governor, and the house of representatives shall elect one of its
members as speaker, to preside over its deliberations. The president of the senate and the speaker
of the house of representatives shall each hold his respective office until his successor has been
elected and qualified. The legislature shall convene in regular sessions on the first Tuesday in
May of 1943 and on the first Tuesday in May in each second year thereafter, until the date of
meeting shall have been changed by act of the legislature and approved by the governor. No such
regular session shall continue for longer than sixty consecutive calendar days. No special session
of the legislature convened in the manner provided by this Constitution shall continue for longer
than thirty consecutive calendar days. The pay of members of the legislature shall be ten dollars
for each day during the period in which the legislature is in session but not exceeding in any
event the number of calendar days for which the legislature is authorized to be in session. Each
member of the legislature shall be paid ten cents per mile in going from his residence to, and in
returning to his residence from, the seat of government, to be computed by the nearest usual route
traveled, and not more than one such travel allowance shall be paid for each session of the
legislature.
The provisions of this Constitution in conflict herewith are hereby modified to conform to the
provisions of this amendment. The provisions of this amendment shall become effective at the
beginning of the term of the members of the legislature elected at the general election in 1942.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 040 074.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1939 ***

AMENDMENT 40 RATIFIED 1939

Amendment of Section 74.

SECTION 74

Restrictions on investment of trust funds by executors, trustees, etc., in private corporations.

No act of the legislature shall authorize the investment of any trust fund by executors,
administrators, guardians, or other trustees in the stock of any private corporation; any such acts
now existing are avoided, saving investments heretofore made; provided, however, that, unless
otherwise provided by the legislature, any of said mentioned trust funds may be invested in
corporation or institutions, investments in which are guaranteed as to principal by the United
States government or insured as to principal by any instrumentality or agency thereof, provided
such investments shall not exceed the amount insured by any such instrumentality or agency.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 041 190.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1939 ***

AMENDMENT 41 RATIFIED 1939

Amendment of Section 190.

SECTION 190

Duty of legislature to pass laws regulating elections, primary elections and purging of registration
lists; provision for use of voting machines.

The legislature shall pass laws not inconsistent with this Constitution to regulate and govern
elections and all such laws shall be uniform throughout the state except that the legislature may,
by general or local law, permit the use of voting machines or other mechanical devices, for
registering, recording and computing the votes at all elections, including primary elections, in
any county, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state, under such regulations
provided by general law with reference thereto as the legislature may from time to time prescribe;
and shall provide by law for the manner of holding elections and of ascertaining the result of the
same, and shall provide general registration laws not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article for the registration of all qualified electors from and after the first day of January, nineteen
hundred and three. The legislature shall also make provision by law, not inconsistent with this
article, for the regulation of primary elections and for punishing frauds at the same, but shall not
make primary elections compulsory. The legislature shall by law provide for purging the
registration list of the names of those who died, become insane, or convicted of crime, or
otherwise disqualified as electors under the provisions of this Constitution, and of any names
which may have been fraudulently entered on such list by the registrars; provided, that a trial by
jury may be had on the demand of any person whose name is proposed to be stricken from the
list.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 042 042.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 42 RATIFIED 1940

Bonds to Pay or Retire Alabama Bridge Commission Bonds.

The state of Alabama is hereby authorized to issue not exceeding $900,000 aggregate principal
amount of bonds for the purpose of paying or retiring prior to maturity, the bonds of Alabama
bridge commission (an agency of the state of Alabama) which were outstanding on July 1, 1939.
Said bonds shall be general obligations of the state of Alabama, to the prompt payment of the
principal of and interest on which the full faith and credit and taxing power of the state are
hereby irrevocably pledged, and all of said bonds, together with any other bonds of the state
providing for a pledge of said gasoline excise tax which may be authorized by constitutional
amendment ratified on the same day as this amendment is ratified shall be additionally secured,
without priority of one bond over another, by a pledge of the proceeds of the gasoline excise tax,
authorized to be pledged to the highway bonds provided for in the amendment to the Constitution
known as article XXA Amendment No. 21, subject, however, to the prior pledge of said gasoline
tax to said highway bonds. The bonds hereby authorized shall bear interest at not exceeding three
per centum (3%) per annum, payable semi-annually, and shall be sold at not less than the par
value thereof. Said bonds and the interest thereon shall be forever exempt from taxes of every
kind. Said bonds shall be issued at such time or times, in such denominations and series and shall
mature at such times, not later, however, than fifteen (15) years from the date of issuance, and
shall have such other terms and conditions as may be provided by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 043 043.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 43 RATIFIED 1940

Regulation of Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Etowah and Cherokee Counties.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries, including the method or basis
of their compensation, to be charged or received by the tax assessors, tax collectors, probate
judges, circuit clerks, sheriffs, and registers of the equity courts, and including the right to place
any one or all of said officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged and collected by said
officers to be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid, and provide the method
and basis of their compensation, provided the salary, fees or compensation of any officer named
herein shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected
or appointed, after his election or appointment, in the following named counties: Etowah and
Cherokee.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 044 044.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 44 RATIFIED 1940

Regulation of Salaries, etc., of Officers of Morgan County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the costs and charges of courts, fees, commissions, allowances and salaries to
be charged or received by any county officer of Morgan county, including, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the judge of probate, tax collector, tax assessor, sheriff, circuit clerk,
and register, including the method and basis of compensation of such officer, and may provide
for the placing of any such officer on a salary and that the fees, costs, and allowances collected
by such officer be paid into the county treasury. All acts of the regular or adjourned session of the
legislature of Alabama which convened in January, 1939, fixing or purporting to fix the
compensation of any such officer on a salary basis are hereby validated and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 045 045.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 45 RATIFIED 1940

Drainage Districts in Colbert County.

The court of county commissioners of Colbert county, Alabama, is authorized to divide said
county into drainage districts for the control of malaria, and said county is authorized and
empowered to levy and collect in the several districts so formed, for use in the control of malaria,
in addition to all other taxes now authorized by law, a special tax of three mills on all taxable
property situated in the several drainage districts so formed, based upon the valuation of such
property as assessed for state taxation, and to be used exclusively for the control of malaria in the
drainage district in which the said tax is levied and collected, provided such tax is authorized by
a majority of the qualified electors residing in such drainage district voting upon such proposition
at an election called and held for the purpose of authorizing such tax, and provided that said tax
shall be levied and collected for a period of ten years from the time that it is authorized at the
election held in such district. Such an election may be called at any time by the court of county
commissioners of said county and shall be held and conducted and the results canvassed as now
provided by law for holding and conducting and canvassing the returns of a regular election.
The proceeds of the tax hereby authorized shall be used exclusively for the control of malaria in
the drainage district in which it is levied and collected and shall be expended through the proper
fiscal agencies of the county government under the direction of the governing body of Colbert
county, and the Colbert county department of public health.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 046 046.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 46 RATIFIED 1940

Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers of Dallas County.

The salaries of the following named county officers of Dallas county, Alabama, but subject to the
provisions of section 281 of the Constitution of Alabama, are fixed as follows: Judge of probate,
$6,000.00 per annum net; tax assessor, $5,000.00 per annum net; tax collector, $5,000.00 per
annum net; sheriff, $4,800.00 per annum net; circuit clerk, $2,400.00 per annum net; register in
chancery, $1,200.00 per annum net; provided, that if the same person holds the offices of circuit
clerk and register in chancery, the salary for both offices shall be $3,000.00 per annum net;
members of the county governing body, exclusive of the judge of probate, $600.00 each per
annum net. The above named officers are hereby required to collect all charges of court, fees,
commissions, allowances, percentages, salaries or other compensation provided by law, other
than the salaries herein fixed, and to cover the same into the county treasury. This shall include
the allowances or amounts received by the sheriff for feeding prisoners from both the state and
federal government, and the county governing body of Dallas county, Alabama, shall pay the
expenses incurred in feeding such prisoners out of the county treasury, but nothing herein shall
be construed as interfering with the allowances or amounts provided by law for guards at the
county jail or bailiffs for courts, or preventing the county governing body of Dallas county,
Alabama, from making such allowances to the sheriff and his deputies for transportation on
official business, including the purchase of automobiles for such use, as it may deem necessary
from time to time. The salaries of the above named county officers of Dallas county, Alabama,
shall be paid out of the county treasury in equal monthly installments. The employees of said
offices shall be selected by the respective officers, and allowances for their compensation shall
be as follows: 1. Office of judge of probate- $6,500 per annum. 2. Office of tax assessor-
$3,600.00 per annum. 3. Office of tax collector- $2,600.00 per annum. 4. Office of sheriff-
$4,500.00 per annum. 5. Office of circuit clerk- $1,350.00 per annum. 6. Office of register in
chancery- None. The county governing body shall have the same authority in regard to the
employment of persons for the county, and the fixing of their compensation, other than the
employees in the above named offices, as provided by law. The salaries of the employees in the
above enumerated offices shall be paid out of the-county treasury in equal monthly installments;
provided, however, that no payment of compensation for any such employee shall be made until
the employee has actually rendered the service for which the payment is to be made. The
legislature of Alabama is hereby authorized and empowered, from time to time, by general or
local laws, to fix, regulate and alter the employment and compensation of the employees in said
offices, including the number and the method and basis of their compensation. The legislature of
Alabama is hereby authorized and empowered, from time to time, by general or local laws, but
subject to the provisions of section 281 of the Constitution of Alabama, to fix, regulate and alter
the charges of court, fees, commissions, allowances, percentages, salaries or other compensation
received by any officer of Dallas county, Alabama, other than the judge of probate, tax assessor,
tax collector, sheriff, circuit clerk and register in chancery, including the method and basis of
their compensation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 047 047.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1940 ***

AMENDMENT 47 RATIFIED 1940

Fees, Commissions, Salaries, etc., of Sheriff of Mobile County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time, by general or local laws fix, alter
and regulate the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries to be charged or received by the
sheriff of Mobile county, and including the right to place said officer on a salary basis and
provide that the fees, fines and forfeitures received or collected by said officer be paid into the
treasury of Mobile county, Alabama, and to fix and provide the amount and method of
compensation of such officer. All acts of the regular session of the legislature of 1939 and 1939-
1940 heretofore passed and applicable, or purporting to be applicable to said Mobile county, and
fixing, or purporting to fix the basis of compensation and compensation of said officer, or
placing said officer on a salary basis, are hereby ratified and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 048 048.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1944 ***


AMENDMENT 48 RATIFIED 1944

Fees, Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Houston County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries, including the method or basis
of their compensation, to be charged or received by the tax assessors, tax collectors, probate
judges, circuit clerks, sheriffs, and registers of the chancery courts, and including the right to
place any one or all of said officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged and collected by
said officers to be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid, and provide the
method and basis of their compensation, or consolidate any of said offices in the following
named county: Houston. All acts of the regular session of the legislature 1943 heretofore passed
and applicable, or purporting to fix the compensation of said named county officers, on a salary
basis, are hereby validated and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 049 194.5 008.0 0 AL 1901 1944 ***

AMENDMENT 49 RATIFIED 1944

Poll Tax Exemption Amendment.

SECTION 194« 

Exemption of veterans of foreign wars from payment of poll tax.

No person who honorably served in the military service of the United States between January 1,
1917 and November 11, 1918, or between September 16, 1940 and December 8, 1941, or at any
time, past or present or future, when the United States was, is or shall be at war with any foreign
state, shall be required after the beginning of such service to pay the poll tax specified in the
Constitution of Alabama as a prerequisite to the privilege of voting in Alabama; but, on the
contrary, every such person shall be exempt from the payment of all poll taxes which have
theretofore accrued and have not been paid or which may thereafter accrue; provided, however,
that if any such person is discharged dishonorably from said service the exemption herein
provided is forfeited, and such dishonorably discharged person, as a prerequisite to the
privilege of voting in Alabama thereafter, must pay the poll tax specified in the Constitution of
Alabama as if such person had never been in such service. The term "military service" as used in
this section includes service in the army of the United States, the United States navy, the marine
corps, the coast guard, the women's army auxiliary corps, the women's appointed
volunteer emergency service, and the women's reserve of the United States navy. The United
States shall not be deemed at war with a foreign state within the meaning of this section at a time
when an armistice exists between the United States and the foreign state. The judge of probate
shall issue a certificate of exemption to a person exempt from the payment of poll tax
by reason of this section under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the governor.
This section shall be self-executing and retroactive; but the legislature is authorized to enact laws
designed to carry out the purposes of this section.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 050 050.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1944 ***

AMENDMENT 50 RATIFIED 1944

Fees, Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Walker County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter from time to time, by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries, including the method or basis
of their compensation, to be charged or received by the tax assessor, tax collector, probate judge,
circuit clerk, sheriff, and register of the circuit court, and including the right to place anyone or
all of said officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged and collected by said officers to
be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid, and provide for the method and basis
of their compensation in Walker county, Alabama. No salary fixed under this amendment shall
affect the compensation of any officer already elected to either of said offices during the term for
which elected, and said salaries, except for the register, shall be fixed at not less than three
hundred and not more than five hundred dollars per month. The balance of said fund or savings
shall be used for old age pensions in said county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 051 251.0 013.0 0 AL 1901 1944 ***

AMENDMENT 51 RATIFIED 1944

Amendment of Section 251.

SECTION 251

Duration of corporations not limited; renewal of existing charters not required.

There shall be no limit of time for the duration of a corporation hereafter organized as a bank or
banking company, and it shall not be necessary hereafter to renew or extend the life or charter of
any such corporation now existing. And all extensions of the life or charter of any such
corporations are hereby ratified and confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 052 052.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 52 RATIFIED 1946

Special Tax for Educational Purposes in Cities of Decatur and Cullman and for Hospital
Purposes in Morgan County.

A Notwithstanding the proviso to the contrary in section 269 of this Constitution, the special tax
for educational purposes provided for by that section may be levied and collected upon taxable
property situated in the city of Decatur (formerly the cities of Decatur and New Decatur). Upon
the adoption of this amendment the governing body of Morgan county shall order an election at
which the qualified electors of the city of Decatur shall determine whether or not such special tax
shall be levied and collected on taxable property in said city. Said election shall be held and
determined as now provided by law for determining whether or not the special one mill county
school tax shall be levied, and if a majority of the electors participating in said election vote in
favor of said levy, said special tax shall be levied upon the taxable property in the city of Decatur
during the tax years commencing with the tax year beginning next after said election and ending
with the tax year beginning on October 1, 1967, and thereafter said special tax may be levied and
collected as is now or hereafter may be provided by law.

B Morgan county may levy and collect a tax upon all taxable property situated therein at a rate
not in excess of ten cents on each one hundred dollars of taxable property, which tax shall be
used exclusively for the construction, equipping, enlargement, acquisition, repair, or operation of
public hospital properties situated in said county owned or proposed to be acquired in said county
by the city of Decatur and Morgan county. Said tax shall be in addition to all other taxes now
authorized by law, but shall not be levied until it shall have been authorized by a majority of the
qualified electors of such county voting at an election called by the governing body of said
county at which there shall be submitted to a vote the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue,
and the purpose or purposes thereof. Such elections may be called and had from time to time, and
shall be had, governed and determined under such rules and regulations as the governing body of
said county
may prescribe. Said tax may be pledged by the governing body of said county to secure payment
of any debt incurred by said county or by any public corporation for hospital purposes in said
county.

C Notwithstanding the proviso to the contrary in section 269 of this Constitution, the special tax
for educational purposes provided for by that section may be levied upon taxable property
situated in the city of Cullman.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 053 053.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 53 RATIFIED 1946

Public Hospitals and Health Facilities.

The state, notwithstanding section 93 of the Constitution as amended and section 94 of the
Constitution, may acquire, build, establish, own, operate and maintain hospitals, health centers,
sanatoria and other health facilities. The legislature for such purposes may appropriate public
funds and may authorize counties, municipalities and other political subdivisions to
appropriate their funds, and may designate or create an agency or agencies to accept and
administer funds appropriated or donated for such purposes by the United States government to
the state upon such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the United States government.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 054 054.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 54 RATIFIED 1946

Taxation in Municipality of Haleyville.

The municipal corporation of Haleyville, through its constituted governing authority may levy
and collect a rate of taxation on the property situated therein, not exceeding in the total in any
one year one per centum of the value of such property as assessed as provided by the Constitution
and the statutes now or hereafter enacted pursuant to the Constitution; provided that the adoption
of this amendment, shall in no wise affect, limit, modify, abridge or impair the power, authority,
or right of said municipal corporation to levy and collect the special school taxes, now or
hereafter vested in or conferred upon it under the Constitution or any amendment thereto, which
said special school taxes shall be in excess of said one per centum herein provided for.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 055 181.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***


AMENDMENT 55 RATIFIED 1946

Amendment of Section 181.

SECTION 181

Persons qualified to register as electors- After January 1, 1903.

After the first day of January, nineteen hundred and three, the following persons, and no others,
who, if their place of residence shall remain unchanged, will have, at the date of the next general
election, the qualifications as to residence, prescribed in section 178 of this article, shall be
qualified to register as electors provided they shall not be disqualified under section 182 of this
Constitution: those who can read and write, understand and explain any article of the
Constitution of the United States in the English language and who are physically unable to work
and those who can read and write, understand and explain any article of the Constitution of the
United States in the English language and who have worked or been regularly engaged in some
lawful employment, business, or occupation, trade, or calling for the greater part of the twelve
months next preceding the time they offer to register, including those who are unable to read and
write if such inability is due solely to physical disability; provided, however, no persons shall be
entitled to register as electors except those who are of good character and who understand the
duties and obligations of good citizenship under a republican form of government.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 056 056.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 56 RATIFIED 1946

Additional Municipal Taxes.
Each municipal corporation in this state whose annual ad valorem tax rate is otherwise limited by
the Constitution or any amendment thereto less than one and one-fourth per centum (1 1/4 %) of
the value of the property situated therein as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year
shall have, in addition to the power to levy and collect such ad valorem tax each year at the rate
authorized immediately prior to the adoption of this amendment, the further power to levy and
collect each year an additional tax or taxes to such extent that the total ad valorem tax rate of
such municipal corporation shall not exceed one and one-fourth per centum (1 1/4 %) in any one
year on the property situated therein based on the valuation of such property as assessed for state
taxation during the preceding year; provided, that before any such additional tax may be so levied
and collected a majority of the qualified electors of any such municipal corporation voting at an
election called for that purpose shall vote in favor of the levy thereof; provided further, that the
total ad valorem tax or taxes to be levied and collected by any such municipal corporation shall
not exceed one and one-fourth per centum (1 1/4 %) in any one year; and provided further, that
the adoption of this amendment shall in no wise affect, limit, modify, abridge or impair the
power, authority or right of any such municipal corporation to levy and collect the special school
taxes now or hereafter vested or conferred upon them, or any of them, under the Constitution or
any amendment thereto, which said special school taxes shall be in excess of said one and one-
fourth per centum (1 1/4 %) herein provided for. Each election held under the provisions hereof
shall be ordered, held, canvassed and may be contested in the same manner as is or may be
provided by the law applicable to municipal corporations for elections to authorize the issuance
of municipal bonds. The ballots used at such elections shall specify the purpose for which the
proposed additional rate of taxation shall be authorized and shall contain the words "For   %
additional rate of taxation"; and "Against   % additional rate of taxation"; the additional rate of
taxation proposed to be shown in the blank space provided therefor. The voter shall record his
choice, whether for or against the additional rate shown, by placing a cross mark before or after
the words expressing his choice. The proceeds of any such additional tax so authorized at any
such election shall be used only for the purpose for which the same shall be authorized at such
election. Elections to authorize the levy of such additional tax may be held as often as ordered by
the governing body of the municipality, but when a proposition is submitted to the electors to
levy such additional tax for a specific purpose and such proposition is defeated then no second
election for the same purpose shall be held in one year thereafter.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 057 057.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 57 RATIFIED 1946

Time and Place of Meetings of Legislature; Biennial Sessions; Organizational Sessions; Election
of President Pro Tempore of Senate and Speaker of House of Representatives; Maximum Length
of Sessions; Compensation and Travel Allowances of Me

All sessions of the legislature shall be held at the capitol in the senate chamber and in the hall of
the house of representatives, unless at any time it should from any cause become impossible or
dangerous for the legislature to meet or remain at the capitol, or for the senate to meet or remain
in the senate chamber, or for the representatives to meet or remain in the hall of the house of
representatives, in which case the governor may convene the legislature, or remove it after it has
convened, to some other place, or may designate some other place for the sitting of the respective
houses, or either of them, as necessity may require. The legislature shall convene on the second
Tuesday in January next succeeding their election and shall remain in session for not longer than
ten consecutive calendar days. No business can be transacted at such sessions except the
organization of the legislature, the election of officers, the appointment of standing committees
of the senate and the house of representatives for the ensuing four years, which election and
appointment may, however, also be made at such other times as may be necessary, the opening
and publication of the returns and the ascertainment and declaration of the results of the
election for governor, lieutenant-governor, attorney-general, state auditor, secretary of state, state
treasurer, superintendent of education, and commissioner of agriculture and industries, the
election of such officers in the event of a tie vote, the determination of contested elections for
such offices, the judging of the election returns and qualification of the members of the
legislature, and the inauguration of the governor and the other elected state officers whose terms
of office are concurrent with that of the governor. At the beginning of each such organization
session, and at such other times as may be necessary, the senate shall elect one of its members
president pro tempore thereof, to preside over its deliberations in the absence of the
lieutenant-governor, and the house of representatives shall elect one of its members as speaker, to
preside over its deliberations. The president of the senate and the speaker of the house of
representatives shall each hold his respective office until his successor has been elected and qualified.
The legislature shall convene in regular sessions on the first Tuesday in May of 1947 and on the first
Tuesday in May in each second year thereafter, until the date of meeting shall have been changed by act
of the legislature and approved by the governor. The legislature shall not remain in session longer
than thirty-six days at any such regular session. Special sessions of the legislature convened in
the manner provided by this Constitution also shall be limited to thirty-six days. The pay of
members of the legislature shall be ten dollars per day. Each member of the legislature shall be
paid ten cents per mile in going from his residence to, and in returning to his residence from, the
seat of government, to be computed by the nearest usual route traveled; and not more than one
such travel allowance shall be paid for each session of the legislature. In addition to his travel
allowance, each member of the legislature also shall be allowed expenses, other than actual
expenses of traveling, not exceeding an amount to be fixed by the legislature, incurred in the
performance of his duties; but such expense allowance shall not be less than the smallest allowance to
any other person traveling within the state in the service of the state of Alabama, or any of its agencies,
for expenses other than actual expenses of traveling. The provisions of this Constitution in conflict
herewith are hereby modified to conform to the provisions of this amendment. The provisions of this
amendment shall become effective at the beginning of the term of the members of the legislature elected
at the general election in 1946.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 058 093.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 58 RATIFIED 1946

Amendment of Section 93.

SECTION 93

State engaging in internal improvements or lending money or credit for same; state interest in
private or corporate enterprises; construction, maintenance, etc., of public roads, highways and
bridges, harbors and seaports and public airports and air navigation facilities.

The state shall not engage in works of internal improvement, nor lend money or its credit in aid
as such, except as may be authorized by the Constitution of Alabama or amendments thereto; nor
shall the state be interested in any private or corporate enterprise, or lend money or its credit to
any individual, association, or corporation, except as may be expressly authorized by the
Constitution of Alabama, or amendments thereto. When authorized by laws passed by the
legislature the state may appropriate funds to be applied to the construction, repair, and
maintenance of public roads, highways and bridges in the state. When authorized by appropriate
laws passed by the legislature the state may at a cost not exceeding ten million dollars engage in
the work of internal improvement, or promoting, developing, constructing, maintaining, and
operating all harbors and seaports within the state or its jurisdiction, provided, that such work or
improvement shall always be and remain under the management and control of the state, through
its state harbor commission, or other governing agency. When authorized by laws passed by the
legislature the state may engage in the construction, improvement, repairs and maintenance and
operation of public airports, air landing fields and other air navigation facilities in the state of
Alabama and may appropriate money or otherwise provide funds for this purpose. The adoption
of this amendment shall not affect in any manner any other amendment to the Constitution of
Alabama which may be adopted pursuant to any act or resolution of this session of legislature.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 059 059.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 59 RATIFIED 1946

Additional County Taxes for County Hospitals.

The governing body of any county in the state of Alabama except Mobile and Montgomery
county must levy and collect or cause to be collected for use in the acquisition by purchase, lease
or otherwise, or for the construction, operation, equipment and maintenance of a county hospital,
in addition to all other taxes now authorized by law, a tax, not in excess of ten mills on
each one hundred dollars, on all property situated within the county, based upon the valuation of
such property in the county as assessed for state taxation, provided such tax is authorized by a
majority of the qualified electors of the county voting upon such proposition at an election called
and held for the purpose of authorizing such tax. Such an election may be called at any time by
the governing body of any county in the state, and said governing body must call such election
upon a petition being filed with the chairman or any member of said governing body requesting
that such an election be called or held when said petition is signed by not less than one hundred
qualified electors of the county in which said election is to be held. Said election shall be held
and conducted and the results canvassed as now provided by law for holding and conducting and
canvassing the returns of an election. The proceeds of the tax hereby authorized must be used
exclusively for the purpose of acquiring by purchase, lease, or otherwise, or the construction,
equipment, maintenance and operation of said county hospital and shall be expended for said
purposes by and under the direction, supervision and control of the county governing body.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 060 060.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1946 ***

AMENDMENT 60 RATIFIED 1946

Debt Limit of Mobile County.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, Mobile county shall continue to have
and possess all of the rights, powers and authority granted to it by amendment XVIII sec.18; of
this Constitution and Act Number 246 of the Local Acts of 1927 p. 151, as the same has been
heretofore amended, and shall have and possess the power and authority to become indebted for
the construction or erection of public buildings, bridges and roads within the limit prescribed by
section 224 of this Constitution; provided, however, that all debts incurred or bonds issued by
Mobile county under the provisions of amendment XXIX sec. 29 shall be in addition to the limit
fixed by said section 224, and shall not be taken into account or considered in determining or
arriving at the debt limit of Mobile county under said section 224, and provided further that the
six and one-half percent (6 1/2 %) limitation in amendment XVIII sec.18. aforesaid shall be
construed to refer not to the total amount of bonds issued under authority of the amendment, but
to the total amount of bonds so issued which may be outstanding at any one time.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 061 061.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1947 ***

AMENDMENT 61 RATIFIED 1947

Disposition of Income Tax; Exemption of Homesteads From State Ad Valorem Tax.

Section A. The entire proceeds of the income tax in the treasury of the state of Alabama on
September 30, 1947, including cash and investments and the interest thereon, shall be used for
the following purposes and in the following manner: 1st. The sum of $12,249,860.00 shall be and
is hereby set aside and shall be and is hereby constituted an irrevocable trust fund for the purpose
of paying the principal of and interest on the bonds issued by the state of Alabama commonly
known as "income tax bonds," being the warrant refunding bonds issued to fund the floating debt
existing October 1, 1932, which bonds were issued under the authority of Act No. 14 approved
February 5, 1935; Acts 1935, p. 27, and Act No. 50 approved February 8, 1935;Acts 1935, p.
118, 2nd. An amount (approximately $6,700,000.00) which, when added to the sinking fund
(approximately $1,857,000.00) heretofore created to pay the bonds issued by the state of
Alabama, commonly known as the "old bonded debt" and as "carpet bag bonds" together with the
interest on said sinking fund accrued on September 30, 1947, shall equal the principal of said
bonds in the sum of $8,557,000.00, shall be and is hereby set aside, and together with said
sinking fund and the interest thereon, shall be and is hereby constituted an irrevocable trust fund
for the purpose of paying the principal of said bonds upon their maturity, said bonds being the
class A renewal bonds, class C renewal bonds and funding renewal bonds. That both of the
irrevocable trust funds herein created shall be invested in United States government securities by
the treasurer of the state of Alabama with the approval of the governor. 3rd. The residue shall be
paid over to the building commission created by Act 128 of 1945 General Acts ;p. 116; to be
expended by said building commission for capital outlay only for educational purposes, provided,
however, that not more than twelve per centum of such amount shall be allocated to the
institutions of higher learning including the state teachers colleges, and not less than eighty-eight
per centum shall be allocated to county and city boards of education on an actual teacher unit
basis in accordance with the minimum school program.

Section B. Beginning October 1, 1947, and thereafter, all net proceeds of such tax, plus the
earnings from investment of the trust funds, must be used only in the manner and in the order
following: (1) To replace the revenue lost to the several funds of the state by reason of the
exemption of homesteads from the state ad valorem tax. All homesteads in Alabama are hereby
declared to be exempt from all state ad valorem tax to the extent of at least $2,000.00 in assessed
value and a sufficient amount is hereby appropriated from the proceeds of the income tax in each
fiscal year to replace the revenue lost to the several funds of the state by reason of the homestead
exemption herein declared; (2) The residue shall be placed in the state treasury to the credit of the
Alabama special education trust fund to be used for the payment of public school teachers
salaries only.

Section C. This amendment supersedes the provisions of amendment XXV 25; (article XXII)
relating to the disposition of the income tax proceeds insofar as the same are in conflict herewith.
All laws relating to the income tax, not in conflict herewith and valid on the date of the
ratification of this amendment, are hereby validated and confirmed. The provisions hereof with
respect to the creation of funds and the use thereof are declared to be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 062 062.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1947 ***

AMENDMENT 62 RATIFIED 1947

Fees, Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Etowah County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter, from time to time by general or local laws, fix,
regulate and alter the fees, commissions, allowances and salaries, including the method or basis
of their compensation, to be charged or received by tax assessors, tax collectors, probate judges,
circuit clerks, sheriffs, and registers of the chancery courts, including the right to place any one or
all said officers on a salary and provide for the fees, allowances or compensation collected by
said officers to be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid, in the following
named county: Etowah. All acts of the legislature, heretofore passed or which may be passed by
the legislature in special or regular session at any time prior to the adoption of this amendment,
and applicable or purporting to be applicable to said county, and fixing or purporting to fix the
compensation to said named county officers on a salary basis, are hereby validated and
confirmed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 063 063.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1947 ***

AMENDMENT 63 RATIFIED 1947

Special Tax for Hospital and Public Health Purposes in Montgomery County.

If the tax is authorized by vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the county in an election
called for that purpose, Montgomery county shall have power to levy and collect a special county
tax not exceeding four mills on each dollar of taxable property in the county to be used solely for
acquiring, constructing, operating, equipping or maintaining county hospitals or other public
hospitals, non-profit hospitals and public health facilities. The board of revenue of said county
may within the limit of four mills on each dollar of taxable property propose a rate of taxation
sufficient for acquiring, constructing and maintaining such hospitals and facilities and the
number of years necessary for such tax to be levied for such purpose, and a rate of taxation to be
levied thereafter sufficient to maintain such hospitals or facilities. A county wide election may be
called at any time by the board of revenue of said county to be conducted in the manner
prescribed by law for general elections, and at which election there shall be submitted to the vote
of the qualified electors of the county the said tax as proposed by the board of revenue of said
county. Such tax must be levied if authorized by vote of the majority of the qualified electors of
the county who participate in the election called for that purpose.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 064 064.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1947 ***

AMENDMENT 64 RATIFIED 1947

Fees, Salaries, etc., of Certain Public Officers in Limestone County.

The legislature of Alabama may hereafter from time to time by general or local laws, but subject
to the provisions of section 281 of the Constitution of Alabama, fix, regulate and alter the costs,
charges of court, fees, commissions, allowances or salaries to be charged or received by the judge
of probate, sheriff, tax assessor, tax collector, clerk of the circuit court, and register in chancery
of Limestone county, Alabama; may provide the method and basis of compensation of such
officers; may fix the terms of office of such officers; and may consolidate any of the offices held
by such officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 065 065.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 65 RATIFIED 1948

Special Tax for Hospital and Public Health Purposes in DeKalb County.

If the tax is authorized by vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the county who
participate in any election called for that purpose, the governing body of DeKalb county must
levy and collect, in addition to all other taxes authorized by law, a special county tax, not
exceeding four mills on each dollar of taxable property in the county, to be used solely for
acquiring, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, constructing, operating, equipping, or maintaining
county hospitals, or other public hospitals, non-profit hospitals and public health facilities, or to
pay any existing debt or liability incurred by the county for such purposes. An election may be
called at any time by the governing body of the county, and must be called within three months
of receipt of a petition signed by not less than five per cent of the qualified electors of the county
requesting that the election be called. The election shall be conducted in the manner prescribed
by the governing body of the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 066 066.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 66 RATIFIED 1948

License Tax on Selling, etc., of Motor Fuel in Marshall County.

The governing body of Marshall county, when authorized to do so by a majority of the qualified
electors of the county voting in a referendum held in the manner prescribed by the county
governing body, may levy and collect a county privilege license tax from any person engaged
within the county in the business of selling or keeping in storage for sale gasoline, woco pep, or
any other motor fuel used by self-propelled vehicles, which tax shall not be in excess of three
cents per gallon on all gasoline, woco pep, or other motor fuel sold or stored, and the proceeds of
which shall be used exclusively for construction and maintenance of hard surface farm-to-market
roads in the county. The governing body of Marshall county shall hold such referendum not less
than sixty nor more than ninety days after the ratification of this amendment; subsequent
referenda may be held at intervals of not less than two years.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 067 067.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 67 RATIFIED 1948

Special School Tax in Etowah County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the several school districts of Etowah county, Alabama, shall have power
to levy and collect a special district tax of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of
taxable property in such districts for public school purposes; provided, that a school district
under the meaning of this section shall include Etowah county, exclusive of the municipalities of
Gadsden and Attalla as one district, the city of Gadsden as one district, and the city of Attalla as
one district; provided further, that the time such tax is to continue and the purpose thereof shall
have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors in each such district and voted for
by a majority of those voting at such election; and further provided that such election shall be
held in the same manner as now provided for an election on the school district tax authorized in
article XIX of the Constitution of Alabama; and be it further provided that the funds arising from
the special school tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the county
shall be expended for the exclusive benefit of the district as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 068 068.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 68 RATIFIED 1948

Calhoun County Special School Tax.

In addition to any taxes now authorized, or that may be hereafter authorized, by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, there is hereby levied a special school tax of fifty cents on each one
hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston
and in the several school districts of Calhoun county to be used solely for public school purposes;
provided such tax and the time it is to continue shall have been first submitted to the vote of the
qualified electors of the school district in which such tax is to be collected and voted for by a
majority of those voting at such election; otherwise said tax shall not be collected. A special
separate election is hereby called on the first Tuesday after sixty days following the date this
Constitutional provision becomes effective, in the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston
and in
the several school districts of Calhoun county, at which election the qualified voters in the cities
of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston and in the several school districts of Calhoun county
may vote as to whether said special school tax herein levied shall be effective for a period of
thirty years, and if the majority of those voting at said election vote in favor of said special school
tax herein referred to, such school tax shall immediately be levied and collected annually
thereafter on the first day of October by the tax collector of Calhoun county, and, if pledged, paid
to the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston; otherwise by him immediately paid to the
board of education of the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston, for a period of thirty
years from the date of said election in the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston, and in
the
several school districts of Calhoun county and a special separate election is likewise hereby
called in each other school district in Calhoun county on the first Tuesday after sixty days
following the date this Constitutional provision becomes effective and the qualified electors of
each such other school district in Calhoun county shall vote as to whether said special school tax
herein levied shall be effective in their respective districts for a period of thirty years, and where
a majority of
those voting at said election in any such school district vote in favor of said special school tax
such special school tax shall be immediately levied and collected annually thereafter on the first
day of October by the tax collector of Calhoun county and if pledged, paid to county of Calhoun;
otherwise by him immediately paid to the board of education of Calhoun county, for a period of
thirty years in any such school district where the majority of such electors voting at said election
vote therefor. This section shall be self-executing.

The funds arising from the special school tax to be levied hereunder and to be collected
therefrom shall be expended for public school purposes for the exclusive benefit of the school
district in which collected with all such tax collected in the city of Jacksonville to be expended in
the city of Jacksonville and with all such tax collected in the city of Piedmont to be expended in
the city of Piedmont and all such tax collected within the Anniston school district to be expended
in the
Anniston school district. After said tax has been voted, and without further authorization or
authority, as and when requested by the boards of education of the cities of Jacksonville,
Piedmont and Anniston, the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston shall issue and sell
interest bearing bonds with principal and interest to be paid from the funds to be derived from
the special school tax hereby levied in the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston and in
the school districts in which the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston are located, for the
sole purpose of construction and improvement of school buildings and the acquiring of sites
therefor; provided, said net proceeds of said bonds shall immediately be paid to the boards of
education of the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston and said bonds shall not be issued
for a longer
period than thirty years, and said funds to be derived from said special school tax may be pledged
by the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston for the payment of said bonds and the
interest thereon, and provided that said bonds shall not be a general obligation of the cities of
Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston or of Calhoun county and shall not be charged to the
constitutional debt limit of the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston or of Calhoun
county. After said tax has been voted, and without further authorization or authority, as and when
requested by the board of education of Calhoun county, Calhoun county shall issue and sell
interest bearing bonds with principal and interest to be paid from the funds to be derived from the
special school tax hereby levied in each school district in Calhoun county, other than in the
cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston and the school districts in which the cities of
Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston are located, for the sole purpose of the construction and
improvement of public school buildings and the acquiring of sites therefor; provided, the net
proceeds of said bonds shall immediately be paid to the board of education of Calhoun
county and that said bonds shall not be issued for longer than thirty years and said funds arising
from said school tax may be pledged by Calhoun county for the payment of said bonds and
interest thereon and provided that said bonds shall not be a general obligation of Calhoun county
and shall not be charged to the constitutional debt limit of Calhoun county.

Except as herein otherwise provided the elections hereinabove provided for shall be called, held,
and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and conducting of district school tax
elections. The governing bodies of the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston shall
appoint and designate the officers, managers, clerks and returning officers and shall call, canvass,
tabulate, and declare the result of the elections provided for in the cities of Jacksonville,
Piedmont and Anniston and in the school districts in which the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont
and Anniston are located. The governing body of Calhoun county shall appoint and designate the
election officers, managers, clerks, and returning officers and shall call, canvass, tabulate, and
declare the result of the elections as to any and all school districts in Calhoun county, other than
in the cities of Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston and the school districts in which the cities of
Jacksonville, Piedmont and Anniston are located. All such elections shall otherwise be
conducted, held, canvassed, tabulated and the results declared as general elections are conducted,
held, canvassed, tabulated and the results declared in Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 069 069.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 69 RATIFIED 1948

Special Tax for Hospital Purposes in Marion County.

The governing body of Marion county shall have the power to levy and collect a special county
tax not exceeding four mills on each dollar's worth of taxable property situated within the county,
based upon the valuation of such property as assessed for state taxation, the proceeds of such tax
to be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, enlarging, repairing, improving,
equipping, furnishing, operating, or maintaining a county hospital or public hospital facilities in
the county for which federal funds have been or may be provided.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 070 070.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 70 RATIFIED 1948

Special Tax for Hospital and Public Health Purposes in Escambia County.

If the tax is authorized by vote of a majority of the qualified electors of Escambia county who
participate in any election called for that purpose, the governing body of said county must levy
and collect, in addition to all other taxes authorized by law, a special county tax, not exceeding
four mills on each dollar of taxable property in the county, to be used solely for acquiring, by
purchase, lease, or otherwise, constructing, operating, equipping, or maintaining county
hospitals, or other public hospitals, non-profit hospitals and public health facilities. An election
may be called at any time by the governing body of the county, and must be called within three
months of receipt of a petition, signed by not less than five percent of the qualified electors of the
county, requesting that the election be called. The election shall be conducted in the manner
which the governing body of the county prescribes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 071 071.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 71 RATIFIED 1948

Tuscaloosa County Special School Tax.

In addition to any taxes now authorized, or that may be hereafter authorized, by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, there is hereby levied a special school tax of fifty cents on each one
hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the city of Tuscaloosa and in the several school
districts of Tuscaloosa county, to be used solely for public school purposes, provided such tax,
and the time it is to continue, shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors
of the school district in which such tax is to be collected and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election; otherwise said tax shall not be collected. A special separate election is
hereby called on the first Tuesday after sixty days following the date this constitutional provision
becomes effective, in the city of Tuscaloosa and in the school district in Tuscaloosa county of
which the city of Tuscaloosa is a part at which election the qualified voters in the city of
Tuscaloosa and in the school district in Tuscaloosa county of which the city of Tuscaloosa is a
part may vote as to whether said special school tax herein levied shall be effective for a period of
thirty years, and if the majority of those voting at said election vote in favor of said special school
tax herein referred to, such school tax shall immediately be levied and collected annually
thereafter on the first day of October by the tax collector of Tuscaloosa county and, if pledged,
paid to the city of Tuscaloosa; otherwise by him immediately paid to the board of education of
the city of Tuscaloosa, for a period of thirty years from the date of said election in the city of
Tuscaloosa and in the school district of which the city of Tuscaloosa is a part, and a special
separate election is likewise hereby called in each other school district in Tuscaloosa county on
the first Tuesday after sixty days following the date this constitutional provision becomes
effective and the qualified electors of each such other school district in Tuscaloosa county shall
vote as to whether said special school tax herein levied shall be effective in their respective
districts for a period of thirty years, and where a majority of those voting at said election in any
such school district vote in favor of said special school tax such special school tax shall be
immediately levied and collected annually thereafter on the first day of October by the tax
collector of Tuscaloosa county and, if pledged, paid to the county of Tuscaloosa; otherwise by
him immediately paid to the board of education of Tuscaloosa county, for a period of thirty years
in any such school district where a majority of such electors voting at said election vote therefor.
This section shall be self-executing.

The funds arising from the special school tax to be levied hereunder and to be collected
therefrom shall be expended for public school purposes for the exclusive benefit of the school
district in which collected with all such tax collected in the city of Tuscaloosa to be expended in
the city of Tuscaloosa. After said tax has been voted, and without further authorization or
authority, as and when requested by the board of education of the city of Tuscaloosa, the city of
Tuscaloosa shall issue and sell interest bearing bonds with principal and interest to be paid from
the funds to be derived from the special school tax hereby levied in the city of Tuscaloosa and in
the school district in which the city of Tuscaloosa is located, for the sole purpose of the
construction and improvement of school buildings and the acquiring of sites therefor; provided,
said net proceeds of said bonds shall immediately be paid to the board of education of the city of
Tuscaloosa and said bonds shall not be issued for a longer period than thirty years, and said funds
to be derived from said special school tax may be pledged by the city of Tuscaloosa for the
payment of said bonds and the interest thereon, and provided that said bonds shall not be a
general obligation of the city of Tuscaloosa or of Tuscaloosa county and shall not be charged to
the constitutional debt limit of the city of Tuscaloosa or of Tuscaloosa county. After said tax has
been voted, and without further authorization or authority, as and when requested by the board of
education of Tuscaloosa county, Tuscaloosa county shall issue and sell interest-bearing bonds
with principal and interest to be paid from the funds to be derived from the special school tax
hereby levied in each school district in Tuscaloosa county, other than in the city of Tuscaloosa
and the school district in which the city of Tuscaloosa is located, for the sole purpose of the
construction and improvement of public school buildings and the acquiring of sites therefor;
provided the net proceeds of said bonds shall immediately be paid to the board of education of
Tuscaloosa county and that said bonds shall not be issued for longer than thirty years and said
funds arising from said school tax may be pledged by Tuscaloosa county for the payment of said
bonds and interest thereon and provided that said bonds shall not be a general obligation of
Tuscaloosa county and shall not be charged to the constitutional debt limit of Tuscaloosa
county.

Except as herein otherwise provided the elections hereinabove provided for shall be called, held
and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and conducting of district school tax
elections. The governing body of the city of Tuscaloosa shall appoint and designate the officers,
managers, clerks and returning officers and shall call, canvass, tabulate and declare the
result of the elections provided for in the city of Tuscaloosa and in the school district in which
the city of Tuscaloosa is located. The governing body of Tuscaloosa county shall appoint and
designate the election officers, managers, clerks and returning officers and shall call, canvass,
tabulate and declare the result of, the elections as to any and all school districts in Tuscaloosa
county other than in the city of Tuscaloosa and the school district in which the city of Tuscaloosa
is located. All such elections shall otherwise be conducted, held, canvassed, tabulated and the
results declared as general elections are conducted, held, canvassed, tabulated and the results
declared in Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 072 072.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 72 RATIFIED 1948

Special Tax for Hospital and Public Health Purposes in Counties Except Mobile, Montgomery
and Jefferson.

If the tax is authorized by vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the county who
participate in any election called for that purpose, the governing body of every county except
Mobile, Montgomery and Jefferson counties must levy and collect, in addition to all other taxes
authorized by law, a special county tax, not exceeding four mills on each dollar of taxable
property in the county to be used solely for acquiring, by purchase, lease, or otherwise,
constructing, operating, equipping, or maintaining county hospitals, or other public hospitals,
non-profit hospitals and public health facilities. An election may be called at any time by the
governing body of the county, and must be called within three months of receipt of a petition,
signed by not less than five percent of the qualified electors of the county, requesting that the
election be called. The election shall be conducted in the manner which the governing body of
the county prescribes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 073 073.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1948 ***

AMENDMENT 73 RATIFIED 1948

Jefferson County Sewer Bonds.

In addition to any indebtedness now authorized, Jefferson county may become indebted and may
issue bonds therefor in an amount not exceeding 3 percent of the assessed valuation of the
taxable property in said county in order to pay the expenses of constructing, improving,
extending and repairing sewers and sewerage treatment and disposal plants in said county. Said
bonds shall be general obligations of Jefferson county but shall also be payable primarily from
and secured by a lien upon the sewer rentals or service charges, which shall be levied and
collected in an amount sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds, replacements,
extensions and improvements to, and the cost of operation and maintenance of, the sewers and
sewerage treatment and disposal plants. Such sewer rentals or service charges shall be levied
upon and collected from the persons and property whose sewerage is disposed of or treated by
the sewers or the sewerage treatment or disposal plants and whether served by the part of the
sewer system then being constructed, improved, or extended or by some other part of such
system; and such charges or rentals shall be a personal obligation of the occupant of the property
the sewerage from which is disposed of by such sewers or treated in such plants and shall also be
a lien upon such property, enforceable by a sale thereof.

Before issuing any bonds or levying or collecting any such sewer service charges or rentals, the
proposal shall first be submitted to and approved by a majority of the voters of the county voting
at an election to be called by the governing body thereof. Notice of such election shall be given
by publication once a week for four successive weeks immediately prior to such election in a
newspaper published and of general circulation in Jefferson county. Such notice and the ballot
shall set forth the purpose for which the bonds are proposed to be issued, the estimated cost of
the proposed undertaking, the amount of bonds to be issued, the serial maturities thereof, and the
maximum rate of interest such bonds are to bear, and a recital that the proposal includes the
levying of sewer service charges or rentals to be secured by liens upon the property served. Such
elections shall in all respects not herein otherwise provided be conducted and the results thereof
ascertained and declared in accordance with the law then in force relating to county bond
elections. If at any such election a majority of the voters vote in favor of the proposed
undertaking and the bonds, the bonds so voted may be issued at one time or from time to time as
the governing body of the county shall deem advisable.

With the prior approval of the governing body of any incorporated municipality therein, Jefferson
county may take over, own, possess, control, expand, improve, maintain and operate any sewers
or sewerage treatment or disposal plants of such incorporated municipality or, if such
incorporated municipality has no sewers, Jefferson county may construct sewers therein. Such
sewers and plants shall thereupon become a part of a combined and consolidated sewer system
for Jefferson county.

The governing body of Jefferson county shall have full power and authority to manage, operate,
control and administer the sewers and plants herein provided for and, to that end, may make any
reasonable and nondiscriminatory rules and regulations fixing rates and charges, providing for
the payment, collection and enforcement thereof, and the protection of its property. Liens for
sewer rentals or service charges shall be foreclosed in such manner as may be provided by law
for foreclosing municipal assessments for public improvements. This amendment is
self-executing.

The authority to issue bonds shall cease December 31, 1958. The authority to levy and collect
sewer charges and rentals shall be limited to such charges as will pay the principal of and interest
on the bonds and the reasonable expense of extending, improving, operating and maintaining
said sewers and plants; and when the bonds shall have been paid off, service charges and rentals
shall be accordingly reduced, it being the intent and purpose of this amendment that the expenses
of needed improvements and extensions and maintenance and operation of the sewers and
sewerage treatment and disposal plants and no other expenditures shall be paid from such service
charges and rentals.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 074 074.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 74 RATIFIED 1948

Bonds for State Board of Health Hospitals and District Tuberculosis Sanitoria.

(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution of the state of Alabama, or any
amendment thereto heretofore adopted, the governor shall from time to time issue negotiable
interest bearing bonds for the purposes and in the manner and subject to the limitations stated in
this amendment. The bonds shall be the general obligation of the state of Alabama and the
full faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the punctual payment of
the bonds and the interest thereon. The aggregate principal amount of all bonds issued hereunder
shall not exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000) and they shall mature within ten years from the
date of issuance.

The proceeds from the sale of such bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used solely for the
construction of hospitals and hospital facilities pursuant to Act No. 211, S. 107, approved July 7,
1945 (General Acts of Alabama, 1945, page 330), or any act supplemental thereto or amendatory
thereof; provided, that the funds appropriated hereby shall be used only for the construction of
hospitals, clinics, or health centers under contracts which have been or are let on or after May 1,
1949, and that the funds shall be used to match federal funds available for hospital, clinic or
health center purposes, and that the local governments in the area where each hospital, clinic or
health center is to be built shall contribute at least as much money for the construction as does
the state; and provided further that the state shall not contribute more than three hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($350,000) to the construction of any one hospital, clinic or health center.

In determining where a hospital, clinic or health center to be constructed with the funds
appropriated herein shall be located, first consideration shall be given to communities which
have no hospital, clinic or health center facilities. Each county having no hospital, clinic or health
center facilities shall be entitled to an allotment of not less than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000)
for such facilities if application is made therefore before January 1 of each year. Any funds
available for
hospital, clinic or health center facilities remaining on January 1 of each year after allotments
have been made to those counties having no such facilities and having not already received an
allotment and which have made application therefor may be allotted to those counties having
such facilities which have made application therefor. However, counties receiving prior
allotments hereunder shall not be precluded from receiving a larger allotment or an additional
allotment at the discretion of the state board of health.

District tuberculosis sanitoria in the districts set up in Act No. 287, S. 22, approved July 7, 1945
Acts 1945, p. 474, shall be eligible for construction under the provisions of this amendment, and
25 percent of the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this amendment shall be reserved
for the construction of tuberculosis sanitoria; provided, at the end of each calendar year funds not
obligated for either general or tuberculosis hospital construction may be used during the next
year for either type construction; and provided further, that the local governments or authorities
in the area where the sanitorium is to be built shall contribute at least as much money as does the
state. A sum not to exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000) may be used by the state board of
health for hospital administration for each of the two (2) years ending in 1950, and 1951; this
appropriation shall be cumulative.

(b) All bonds issued hereunder and interest thereon shall be payable from any funds in the state
treasury not otherwise appropriated. The bonds shall be payable in substantially equal
installments of principal and interest beginning in the next fiscal year after their date; they shall
bear interest at a rate not exceeding two percent per annum payable semi-annually; and they shall
contain a provision for their call for payment at such a time or times prior to maturity, and at such
a premium, if any, as the governor may prescribe. All bonds issued hereunder shall be sold to the
highest bidder at a duly advertised public sale, on sealed bids or at auction, and shall not be sold
for less than par and accrued interest; provided, bidders may be invited to name the rate of
interest which the bonds are to bear, in which case the bonds shall not be sold at a price which
would yield more than two percent according to standard bond tables, taking into account the
discount and call privilege.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 075 075.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 75 RATIFIED 1948

Bonds, etc., for Hospital Purposes or Health Facilities in Marion County.

The provisions of section 224 of the Constitution of Alabama notwithstanding, the governing
body of Marion county, Alabama, is hereby authorized to issue bonds, warrants, or other
evidences of indebtedness and to pledge in payment of the principal and interest due upon any
such bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, only the proceeds derived, or
to be derived, from any special county privilege, license or excise taxes heretofore or hereafter
levied and collected within Marion county, Alabama, for the sole and exclusive purpose of
constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining or improving public hospitals or related hospital
or health facilities, including clinics, nursing homes, public health centers and laboratory
facilities, or for such other public purposes of any kind and description as in the judgment of the
governing body of the county of Marion is meet and proper. The proceeds derived from the sale
of such bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness, may be used by the governing body
of Marion county for any or all of the purposes enumerated herein, and no other. The bonds,
warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness issued and sold under the provisions of this
amendment may be interest bearing bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness with
maturity date fixed at any time within thirty years next succeeding the date of issuance of such
securities.

The tax levied and the method of collection provided therefor by Act No. 115 approved June 22,
1949 Acts 1949, p. 139, levying in Marion county, Alabama, and additional special privilege or
license taxes and excise taxes be and the same hereby is in all things validated and confirmed,
any provision or provisions of the Constitution of Alabama of 1901 to the contrary
notwithstanding.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 076 076.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 76 RATIFIED 1949

Special County Tax for Public Hospital Purposes.

This amendment shall apply in all counties except Mobile and Jefferson counties. The term
"public hospital purposes" as used in this amendment shall be construed to include the
acquisition by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and the construction, equipment, operation, and
maintenance of public hospital facilities. The term "public hospital facilities" as used in this
amendment shall be construed to include, public hospitals, public clinics, public health centers,
nurses' homes and training facilities, and related public health facilities of any kind.  If a majority
of the qualified electors of any county in the state, except Mobile and Jefferson counties, who
participate in an election held therein pursuant to the provisions of any amendment to the
Constitution heretofore adopted shall vote at such election in favor of the levy and collection of a
special county tax, within the limitations provided in such amendment, for any one or more of
the purposes included within the meaning of the term public hospital purposes, the proceeds
derived from the tax authorized at such election may be applied for any one or more of the
purposes for which said tax may be so voted. Whenever the tax shall be voted the governing
body of the county may anticipate the proceeds therefrom for any one or more of the purposes for
which the tax shall be voted by issuing, without further election, interest bearing tax anticipation
bonds, warrants, or certificates of indebtedness of said county payable solely from and secured by
a pledge of not
exceeding 75% of the annual proceeds from said tax received by the county.

The governing body of each county in which the said tax may be voted shall have the further
power to designate as the agency of the county to acquire, construct, equip, operate and maintain
public hospital facilities any public corporation heretofore or hereafter organized for hospital
purposes in the county under any general law heretofore or hereafter enacted by the legislature.
When a public corporation shall be so designated, the proceeds of said tax thereafter collected
shall be paid over to it and shall be used by it for any one or more of the purposes for which the
tax shall have been voted; provided, that payment of the proceeds of said tax to said public
corporation shall be made only to such extent as will not result in the impairment of the
obligation of any contract theretofore made with respect to said tax. Said public corporation may
anticipate the proceeds from said tax so required to be paid to it by issuing, for any one or more
of the purposes for which the tax shall have been voted, the bonds, warrants, or certificates of
indebtedness of said public corporation, and may pledge for the payment of the principal thereof
and interest thereon not exceeding 75% of the annual proceeds from said tax
so paid to it. 

Each county in which the tax shall be voted, and in the event a public corporation shall have been
designated as the agency of such county pursuant to the provisions hereof then said public
corporation, shall have the power to contract with any other county or similar public corporation
with respect to the acquisition by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and the construction, equipment,
operation, and maintenance of public hospital facilities outside of the county and within any zone
or region of which the county may be a part, and which may have heretofore been established or
may hereafter be established for public hospital purposes by the legislature or by any agency
designated by it, the obligations of such contract to be payable solely out of the proceeds of said
tax; provided, that the proceeds of said tax shall not be used outside of the county
for any purpose for which the proceeds could not be used in the county, and shall not be used
with respect to public hospital facilities located outside of the county if the tax is voted
specifically for public hospital facilities located in the county.

No securities issued or contracts made by a county under the authority of this amendment, which
are payable solely out of the proceeds of said tax, and no securities issued or contracts made by
any such public corporation, whether or not issued or made under the authority of this
amendment, shall be construed to be bonds of the county or of a political subdivision
thereof within the meaning of section 222 of the Constitution, or construed to create or constitute
an indebtedness of the county within the meaning of section 224 of the Constitution. Said
securities shall be construed to be negotiable instruments notwithstanding the fact that they may
be payable solely from a limited source. All pledges of said tax and all contracts made
with respect thereto pursuant to the provisions of this amendment shall take precedence in the
order in which they are made and shall create a charge on the proceeds of said tax prior to the
expenses of operating and maintaining any public hospital facilities.

In each instance in which a special county tax for any one or more of the purposes included
within the meaning of the term "public hospital purposes" has heretofore been authorized at an
election held in a county pursuant to the provisions of any amendment to the Constitution
heretofore adopted, all provisions of this amendment shall be applicable in said county to the
same extent as if said election had been held after the adoption of this amendment. 

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 077 077.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 77 RATIFIED 1949

Special School Tax in St. Clair County.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama,
there is hereby levied and shall be collected a special school tax of fifty cents on each one
hundred dollars worth of taxable property in St. Clair county, the proceeds of which shall be used
exclusively for public school purposes; provided, the time the tax is to continue and the
purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county
and voted for by a majority of those voting at such election. The election provided for herein
shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the manner provided for an
election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III 3, article XIX of the Constitution
of Alabama, by article 7, chapter 10, Title 52 of the Code of Alabama (1940). The collection
of the tax and the use of the proceeds shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of
article 7, chapter 10, Title 52 of the Code of Alabama (1940).

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 078 078.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 78 RATIFIED 1949

Cherokee County Special School District Tax.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the several school districts of Cherokee county, Alabama, shall have the
power to levy and collect a special district tax of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of
taxable property in such districts for public school purposes; provided, that the time during which
such tax is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors in each such district and voted for by a majority of those voting at such
election, the election to be held in the same manner as now provided by law for an election on
the school district tax authorized in article XIX of the Constitution of Alabama. The funds arising
from such special tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the county
shall be expended for the exclusive benefit of the district as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 079 079.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 79 RATIFIED 1949

Special School District in Lawrence County.

The board of education of Lawrence county may designate and establish a special school district
within the school district in which the municipality of Courtland is located, and it may become
indebted and issue bonds in an amount not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
for the construction and equipment of a school building within said district. To pay said
indebtedness, and the interest thereon, Lawrence county may levy and collect an annual tax on all
property situated within said district, at a rate not in excess of five mills; provided, whenever
enough has been collected to retire the bonds and pay the interest thereon the tax will cease and
any surplus remaining will revert to the Courtland school district. The indebtedness, the bonds,
and the tax herein authorized shall be in addition to those heretofore authorized; but no such
additional indebtedness shall be incurred, no such bonds shall be issued, and no such tax shall be
levied, until the estimated cost of constructing and equipping said school building hereby
proposed to be built, its time of completion, and the amount of the increased indebtedness, the
rate of interest to be paid thereon, and the period over which the bonds to be issued will
be refunded, shall have been determined upon and made public by the board of education of said
county, and the proposed increase in indebtedness and the issuance of bonds and the increase in
the rate of taxation shall have been authorized by a majority of the qualified electors of said
special school district voting upon such proposal at an election to be called by the county
governing body for said purposes, said election to be held not less than sixty (60) nor more than
one hundred twenty (120) days after the adoption of this amendment. The election provided for
herein shall be called, held, and conducted as three-mill school tax elections are held pursuant to
article 7, chapter 10, Title 52 of the Code of Alabama (1940).

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 080 080.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1949 ***

AMENDMENT 80 RATIFIED 1949

Huntsville Special School Tax.

(A) In addition to any taxes now authorized, or that may be hereafter authorized, by the
Constitution and laws of Alabama, there is hereby levied a special school tax of fifty cents on
each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the school tax district of the city of
Huntsville in Madison county to be used solely for public school purposes; provided such tax and
the time it is to continue shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the
said school tax district in which such tax is to be collected and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election, otherwise said tax shall not be collected. A special separate election is
hereby called on the first Tuesday after sixty days following the date this amendment becomes
effective in the school tax district of the city of Huntsville in Madison county, at which election
the qualified voters in the said school tax district of Madison county may vote as to whether said
special school tax herein levied shall be effective; and if the majority of those voting at said
election vote in favor of said special school tax such school tax shall immediately be levied and
collected annually thereafter on the first day of October by the tax collector of Madison county
and paid to the city of Huntsville. The proceeds of the tax are hereby pledged solely to the
payment of the principal and interest of the bonds hereinafter provided for. This section shall be
self-executing.

(B) After said tax has been voted, and without further authorization the city of Huntsville shall
issue and sell interest bearing bonds with principal and interest to be paid from the proceeds of
the tax herein levied. The proceeds of the sale of the bonds shall be used for the sole purpose of
constructing and improving school buildings and acquiring sites therefor; provided, the net
proceeds of the bonds shall be paid immediately to the board of education of the city of
Huntsville. The principal amount of the bonds shall in no event exceed the sum of five hundred
seventy-five thousand dollars ($575,000). All bonds issued hereunder shall be payable in annual
installments, the first of which shall be payable not more than two years after the date of the
bonds, and the last within the period of usefulness of the improvements for which the bonds are
issued. Such bonds shall be callable at any time upon the payment of the principal amount
thereof plus a premium equal to one year's interest thereon. The bonds shall not be a general
obligation of the city of Huntsville or of Madison county and shall not be charged to the
constitutional debt limit of the city of Huntsville or Madison county.

(C) If sufficient revenue has been produced by the tax levied in paragraph (A) of this amendment
to pay the principal amount of the bonds issued hereunder with interest thereon prior to the
expiration of the period for which the tax was levied, the tax shall immediately cease and shall no
longer be collected or enforced, and the bonds shall be redeemed forthwith.

(D) Except as herein otherwise provided the election hereinabove provided for shall be called,
held and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and conducting of district school tax
elections. The governing body of the city of Huntsville shall appoint and designate the officers,
managers, clerks and returning officers and shall call, canvass, tabulate, and declare the result of
the election provided for in the city of Huntsville. The election shall otherwise be conducted,
held,
canvassed, tabulated and the results declared as general elections are conducted, held, canvassed,
tabulated and the results declared in Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 081 081.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***

AMENDMENT 81 RATIFIED 1950

Establishing or Abolishing Branch Courthouse or Division or Branch of Court of Record.

After the ratification of this amendment, the legislature shall not establish any branch courthouse
or any division or branch of any court of record to be held at any place other than the county seat,
nor shall the legislature abolish any branch courthouse now existing or abolish any division or
branch of any court of record now existing, unless such proposal be first submitted to a vote of
the qualified electors of the county or counties to be affected and is approved by a majority of
those voting upon such proposition.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 082 082.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***


AMENDMENT 82 RATIFIED 1950

Jefferson County Consolidation School Tax Amendment.

Jefferson county shall have power to levy and collect an additional tax of 50 cents on each $100
of taxable property therein for public school purposes in the same manner and subject to the
same election requirements as are now provided in the third amendment to this Constitution with
respect to county school taxes; provided that in any incorporated municipality where special or
additional taxes are being levied and collected for public school purposes, including the servicing
of debts incurred for public schools, the additional tax herein provided for shall be reduced by the
amount of such special or additional municipal public school taxes in the corporate limits where
such special or additional municipal public school taxes are being levied and collected and
during the time such taxes are levied and collected; and provided further that only
qualified electors residing within the area in which the additional tax herein authorized is
proposed to be levied shall have the right to vote at any election held for the purpose of voting
such additional tax, and qualified voters residing in incorporated municipalities which are
levying and collecting a full tax of 50 cents on each $100 of taxable property for public school
purposes shall not be entitled to vote at such election. So long as the public schools in any
incorporated municipality are operated separately from those of Jefferson county, the funds
arising from such additional tax on taxable property in such municipality shall be expended only
by the board of education or other authority charged with the operation of the public schools in
such municipality and only for the benefit of the public schools therein. The additional tax herein
authorized
shall be in addition to the county and the district school taxes authorized in section 269 of and
the third amendment to this Constitution and in addition to the county taxes authorized in section
215 thereof. All statutes relating to the holding of elections and the levy and collection of taxes in
counties under the third amendment to this Constitution, with the exception hereinabove
provided, shall apply. 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 083 083.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***

AMENDMENT 83 RATIFIED 1950

Vacancies in Office of Judge of Circuit Court Holding at Birmingham.

All vacancies in the office of judge of the circuit court holding at Birmingham which shall occur
subsequent to January 15, 1951 shall be filled in the manner and for the time as herein provided.

The Jefferson county judicial commission is hereby created for the purpose of nominating to the
governor persons for appointment to such a vacancy. The members of such commission shall be
(a) two persons who are members of the Alabama state bar, and (b) two persons who are not
members of the Alabama state bar, and (c) one judge of the circuit court holding at Birmingham.

All members of such commission must reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court
holding at Birmingham.

The two members of such commission who are required to be members of the Alabama state bar
shall be elected by the members of such bar who are regularly licensed and qualified to practice
law in this state and who reside in the territorial jurisdiction of the circuit court holding at
Birmingham. The executive committee of the Birmingham bar association or its successor body
in such capacity, is authorized and directed to make rules, not inconsistent with this amendment,
for the election of such members of such commission as are required to be members of the
Alabama state bar. Such executive committee shall certify in writing to the probate judge of
Jefferson county the names of the persons elected as members of such commission by such
members of such bar.

The senator and representatives in the Alabama legislature from Jefferson county shall elect the
two members of such commission who are required not to be members of the Alabama state bar.
Such senator and representatives shall certify in writing to such probate judge the names of the
persons elected by them as such members.

The judges of the circuit court holding at Birmingham shall elect the member of such
commission who is required to be a judge of such circuit court. The judges of such circuit court
shall certify in writing to such probate judge the name of the circuit judge elected by such circuit
judges as such member.

The terms of office of all members of such commission shall be six years, except that the terms
of office of the two members of the state bar first elected shall be for one and two years
respectively, and of the two members first elected by the senator and representatives in the
Alabama legislature from Jefferson county shall be for three and four years respectively, and the
term of the circuit judge elected by the circuit judges shall be for five years; the length of such
terms of office of the members of such commission being indicated by the respective electing
bodies. The terms of the initial members of such commission shall begin on January 16, 1951. A
vacancy in the office of a member of such commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as such member was originally chosen.

The probate judge of Jefferson county shall record all such certificates of election and shall safely
and permanently keep the original certificates. Forthwith upon his receipt and recordation of
every such certificate, he shall send to the governor a certified copy of every such certificate.

No member of such commission shall be eligible to succeed himself as such member or for
nomination to the governor for appointment as judge of such circuit court during the term of
office for which such member shall have been selected.

The members of such commission shall not receive any salary or other compensation for their
services as such members. No member of such commission other than the member required to be
a judge of the circuit court shall hold any public office, and no member of such commission shall
hold any official position in any political party.

If, subsequent to January 15, 1951, a vacancy occurs in the office of judge of the circuit court
holding at Birmingham, such commission shall nominate to the governor three persons having
the qualifications for such office. Such nomination shall be made only by the concurrence of a
majority of the members of such commission. The governor shall appoint to the office in
which the vacancy exists one of the three persons so nominated for such office. The appointee
shall hold such office until the next general election for any state officer held at least six months
after the vacancy occurs and until his successor is elected and qualified; the successor shall hold
office for the unexpired term and until his successor is elected and qualified.

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 084 084.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***

AMENDMENT 84 RATIFIED 1950

Economic Development of Municipalities in Marion County.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, any municipality in Marion county, or any one or more of them, shall have full
and continuing power and authority, without any election or approval other than the approval of
its governing body, to do any one or more of the following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described
in subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipality or
may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in any municipality in Marion county or upon
all property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such municipality shall
describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited by any proposed use
or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of any
municipality in Marion county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in
the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in
function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body
all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon any such municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no
purchaser or holder thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall
continue until the principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall
have been paid in full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness issued hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of any municipality
in Marion county for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of such municipality
under sections 224 and 225 of the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in
addition to those provided for or permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all
amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 085 085.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***

AMENDMENT 85 RATIFIED 1950

Court Costs and Charges, Fees, Salaries, etc., of Officers in Talladega County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Talladega county, and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances,
or salary of, and the method of compensating any officer of Talladega county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 086 086.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1950 ***

AMENDMENT 86 RATIFIED 1950

Special School Tax in Monroe County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the several school districts of Monroe county, Alabama shall have the
power to levy and collect a special district tax of thirty cents on each one hundred dollars worth
of taxable property in such districts for school purposes; provided, that the levying of such tax
and the time during which it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to a vote of the qualified electors in each such district and voted for by a majority of
those voting at such election; and further provided that such election shall be held in the same
manner as now provided for an election on the school district tax authorized in article XIX of the
Constitution of Alabama; and be it further provided that the funds arising from the special school
tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the county shall be expended for
the exclusive benefit of the district as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 087 087.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1951 ***

AMENDMENT 87 RATIFIED 1951

Bond Issue for Acquiring, etc., Public Roads, Highways and Bridges in Conjunction With United
States.

The state is authorized to appropriate funds, and to sell and issue interest-bearing state bonds, in
addition to those heretofore authorized and sold, in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding
$25,000,000 for the purpose of aiding in the acquisition, construction, and improvement of
public roads, highways, and bridges in the state; provided, that the proceeds derived from the sale
of the bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment may be used only for supplying the
state's share of the cost of acquiring, constructing, and improving public roads, highways, and
bridges in the state in conjunction with the United States and toward the cost of which funds
have heretofore been or may hereafter be allocated to the state under the provisions of any law of
the United States now in effect or hereafter enacted. Bonds sold and issued under the provisions
of this amendment may be issued at such time or times and in such denominations, numbers,
and series, and shall mature at such time or times, and shall have such terms and conditions, as
may be provided by law. Said bonds shall bear interest at a rate or rates not greater than three per
centum (3%) per annum, payable semiannually, and shall be sold at not less than the face value
thereof. Said bonds when issued shall be direct general obligations of the state, and for the
prompt and faithful payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon the full faith and credit
of the state are hereby irrevocably pledged. In addition thereto, there is hereby irrevocably
pledged for payment of the principal of and interest on said bonds, pro rata and without priority
of one bond over another, so much as may be necessary for said purpose of the proceeds of the
gasoline excise tax heretofore pledged for payment of the public road and bridge bonds of the
state of Alabama provided for in the amendment to the Constitution of Alabama known as article
XXA amendment No. 21 subject, however, to the prior pledges of said tax for payment of any
bonds heretofore issued pursuant to law for which the said tax has heretofore been pledged.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 088 088.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1951 ***

AMENDMENT 88 RATIFIED 1951

Appointments and Promotions in Civil Service.

A Appointments and promotions in the civil service of this state shall be made according to
merit, fitness and efficiency, to be determined, so far as practicable, by examination, which, so
far as practicable, shall be competitive under such laws as the legislature may enact.

B It shall be the duty of the legislature to maintain laws necessary to implement, and to provide
adequate financial support for, a positive program of personnel management in the state service.

C All state personnel laws now in effect that are not in conflict with this article shall continue in
effect until they are amended or repealed as provided by law. Civil service status acquired by
employees under existing statutes shall not be affected by the provisions of this article.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 089 276.0 015.0 0 AL 1901 1951 ***


AMENDMENT 89 RATIFIED 1951

Amendment of Sections 272, 273 and 276.

SECTION 276

Appointment of adjutant general, general officers and governor's staff.

The governor shall, with the advice and consent of the senate, appoint the adjutant general and all
general officers. The governor shall appoint his own staff, as may be provided by law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 090 090.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1951 ***

AMENDMENT 90 RATIFIED 1951

Veteran's Poll Tax Exemption Amendment.

No person who honorably served in the military service of the United States between January 1,
1917 and November 11, 1918, or between September 16, 1940 and December 8, 1941, or at any
time past, present or future, when the United States was, is or shall be engaged in hostilities,
whether as a result of a declared war or not, with any foreign state shall be required after the
beginning of such service to pay the poll tax specified in the Constitution of Alabama as a
prerequisite to the privilege of voting in Alabama; but, on the contrary, every such person shall
be exempt from the payment of all poll taxes which have theretofore accrued and have not been
paid or which may thereafter accrue; provided, however, that if any such person is discharged
dishonorably from service the exemption herein provided is forfeited, and such dishonorably
discharged person, as a prerequisite to the privilege of voting in Alabama thereafter, must pay the
poll tax specified in the Constitution of Alabama as if such person had never been in service. The
term "military service" as used herein includes service in the United States army, the United
States navy, the United States air force, the marine corps, the coast guard, or any reserve or
auxiliary complement of any of said services. The judge of probate shall issue a certificate of
exemption to a person exempt from the payment of poll tax by reason of this amendment under
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the governor. This amendment shall be
self-executing and retroactive; but the legislature is authorized to enact laws designed to carry out
the purpose of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 091 181.0 008.0 AL 1901 1951 ***


AMENDMENT 91 RATIFIED 1951

Amendment of Section 181.

SECTION 181

Persons qualified to register as voters; persons registered under 1901 Constitution not required to
reregister. 

The following persons, and no others, who, if they are citizens of the United States over the age
of twenty-one years and have the qualifications as to residence prescribed in section 178 of this
article, shall be qualified to register as electors provided they shall not be disqualified under
section 182 of this Constitution: those who can read and write any article of the Constitution of
the United States in the English language which may be submitted to them by the board of
registrars, provided, however, that no persons shall be entitled to register as electors except those
who are of good character and who embrace the duties and obligations of citizenship under the
Constitution of the United States and under the Constitution of the state of Alabama, and
provided, further, that in order to aid the members of the boards of registrars, who are hereby
constituted and declared to be judicial officers, to judicially determine if applicants to register
have the qualifications hereinabove set out, each applicant shall be furnished by the board of
registrars a written questionnaire, which shall be uniform in all cases with no discrimination as
between applicants, the form and contents of which questionnaire shall be prescribed by the
supreme court of Alabama and be filed by such court with the secretary of state of the state of
Alabama, which questionnaire shall be so worded that the answers thereto will place before the
boards of registrars information necessary or proper to aid them to pass upon the qualification of
each applicant. Such questionnaire shall be answered in writing by the applicant, in the presence
of the board without assistance, and there shall be incorporated in such answer an
oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state
of Alabama and a statement in such oath by the applicant disavowing belief in or affiliation at
any time with any group or party which advocated the overthrow of the government of the United
States or the state of Alabama by unlawful means, which answers and oath shall be duly signed
and sworn to by the applicant before a member of the county board of registrars. Such
questionnaire and the written answers of the applicant thereto shall be filed with the records of
the respective boards of registrars. The board may receive information respecting the applicant
and the truthfulness of any information furnished by him. Those persons who have registered as
electors under the Alabama Constitution of 1901 shall not be required to
register again. Provided, further, that if solely because of physical handicaps the applicant is
unable to read or write, then he shall be exempt from the above stated requirements which he is
unable to meet because of such physical handicap, and in such cases a member of the board of
registrars shall read to the applicant the questionnaire and oaths herein provided for
and the applicant's answers thereto shall be written down by such board member, and the
applicant shall be registered as a voter if he meets all other requirements herein set out.


*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 092 092.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1952 ***

AMENDMENT 92 RATIFIED 1952

Increasing or Decreasing Salaries, etc., of State and County Officers.

Any provisions of this Constitution or amendments thereto to the contrary notwithstanding,
neither the legislature, nor any county of the state shall, by the imposition of new, different, and
additional duties or otherwise, increase, or authorize the increase of, the salary, fees or other
compensation of any officer of the state or of any county of the state, who is elected or
appointed for a fixed term, during the term for which he is elected or appointed, regardless of
whether such officer may be removed at the pleasure of the authority electing or appointing him
or only upon impeachment; nor shall the legislature or any county of the state in any manner or
by any means decrease, or authorize the decrease of, the salary, fees or other compensation of any
such officer, during the term for which he is elected or appointed; nor shall the legislature or any
county of the state increase or decrease, or authorize the increase or decrease of, the salary, fees
or other compensation of any person filling an unexpired term in any such office during the
remainder of such term, either before or after the appointment or election of such person to fill
the unexpired term. As to officers who are members of any court, board, commission, or similar
body whose terms do not run concurrently, any increase or decrease in the salary, fees, or other
compensation of the members of any such court, board, commission, or similar body shall
become effective as to all such members thereof immediately after the expiration of the term or
terms of office of the member or members whose term or terms first expire.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 093 093.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1952 ***

AMENDMENT 93 RATIFIED 1952

Expenditure of Fees or Taxes Relating to Use, etc., of Vehicles and to Fuels Used for Vehicles.

No moneys derived from any fees, excises, or license taxes, levied by the state, relating to
registration, operation, or use of vehicles upon the public highways except a vehicle-use tax
imposed in lieu of a sales tax, and no moneys derived from any fee, excises, or license taxes,
levied by the state, relating to fuels used for propelling such vehicles except pump taxes, shall
be expended for other than cost of administering such laws, statutory refunds and adjustments
allowed therein, cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of public highways
and bridges, costs of highway rights-of-way, payment of highway obligations, the cost of traffic
regulation, and the expense of enforcing state traffic and motor vehicle laws. The provisions of
this amendment shall not apply to any such fees, excises, or license taxes now levied by the state
for school purposes for the whole state or for any county or city board of education therein.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 094 094.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1952 ***

AMENDMENT 94 RATIFIED 1952

Economic Development of Municipalities in Fayette County.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, any municipality in Fayette county, or any one or more of them, shall have full
and continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do any one
or more of the following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipality or
may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in any municipality in Fayette county or upon
all property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such municipality shall
describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited by any proposed use
or expenditure of the proceeds of such
tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it. 

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of any
municipality in Fayette county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in
the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in
function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body
all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon any such municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of any municipality in Fayette county for the
purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of such municipality under sections 224 and 225
of the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

10 No municipality shall make any engagement or commitment or undertake any project under
the provisions hereof unless and until the proposition has been approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of such municipality. The governing body of any municipality may provide for
holding such elections, but in no case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of
the proposition to be voted on has been published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 095 095.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1952 ***

AMENDMENT 95 RATIFIED 1952

Economic Development of Municipalities in Blount County.
Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, any municipality in Blount county, or any one or more of them, shall have full
and continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do any one
or more of the following:
1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.
2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described
in subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.
3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.
4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.
5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.
6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipality or
may be limited as to the source of their payment.
7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in any municipality in Blount county or upon all
property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such municipality shall
describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited by any proposed use
or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.
8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.
9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of any
municipality in Blount county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in
the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in
function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body
all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon any such municipality.
The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of any municipality in Blount county for the
purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of such municipality under sections 224 and 225
of the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.
This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.
10 No municipality shall make any engagement or commitment or undertake any project under
the provisions hereof unless and until the proposition has been approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of such municipality. The governing body of any municipality may provide for
holding such elections, but in no case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of
the proposition to be voted on has been published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 096 178.0 008.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 96 RATIFIED 1953

Amendment of Section 178.

SECTION 178

Residency, registration and poll tax requirements for electors.

To entitle a person to vote at any election by the people, he shall have resided in the state at least
two years, in the county one year, and in the precinct or ward three months, immediately
preceding the election at which he offers to vote, and he shall have been duly registered as an
elector, and shall have paid on or before the first day of February next preceding the date of the
election at which he offers to vote, all poll taxes due from him for the two calendar years next
preceding. Provided, that any elector who, within three months next preceding the date of the
election at which he offers to vote has removed from one precinct or ward to another precinct or
ward in the same county, incorporated town, or city, shall have the right to vote in the precinct or
ward from which he has so removed, if he would have been entitled to vote in such precinct or
ward but for such removal.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 097 097.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 97 RATIFIED 1953

Special Elections to Fill Vacancies in Either House of Legislature.

Whenever a vacancy occurs in either house of the legislature the governor shall issue a writ of
election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term. However, if the secretary of state
determines that a legally qualified candidate for election to the vacancy is unopposed when the
last date for filing certificates of nomination has passed, the election shall not be held.
The secretary of state shall issue a certificate of election to the candidate, the same as if an
election had been held, and the certificate shall be accepted by the house in which the vacancy
occurred as evidence of the unopposed candidate's right to fill the position created by the
vacancy. In the event an election is held, all the costs and expenses incurred thereby shall be paid
out of any funds in the state treasury not otherwise appropriated.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 098 098.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 98 RATIFIED 1953

Levy and Collection of Additional Property Taxes in Talladega County.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, the
governing body of Talladega county is hereby authorized to levy and collect a special school tax
not to exceed three-tenths of one percent on the value of the taxable property within the county,
the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for public school purposes; and a special tax not
to exceed two-tenths of one percent on the value of the taxable property within the county,
the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for the construction and maintenance of county
roads and bridges. The governing body of Talladega county may fix the rates of the additional
taxes authorized herein, at its discretion, without submitting the question of levying such
additional taxes to a vote of the qualified electors of the county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 099 099.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 99 RATIFIED 1953

Authorizing the Creation of Special School Districts, etc., in Lawrence County.

The board of education of Lawrence county may designate one or more school districts within
said county (except that no part of the territory embraced within the special school district
established under the provisions of the amendment of the Constitution proposed by Act No. 473
of the regular session of the legislature of Alabama of 1949 Acts 1949, p. 690 shall be included
in any such special school district) and may sell the issue bonds in an amount not exceeding one
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000) for each such special school district for the
construction, improving, adding to, or equipping of a school building, or buildings, within said
district. To pay the principal of and interest on said bonds and any redemption premium thereon,
Lawrence county may levy and collect an annual tax on all taxable property situated within the
special school district with respect to which such bonds may be issued, at a rate not in excess of
five mills on each dollar's worth of said property as assessed for state taxation for the preceding
tax year; provided, that whenever said tax has produced an amount sufficient to pay the principal
of and interest on said bonds the tax shall not be thereafter levied and any surplus remaining
therefrom shall be used for general school purposes in said school district. The bonds and tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to those heretofore authorized, and no such bonds shall be
issued, no such tax shall be levied, until the estimated cost of constructing, improving, adding to,
or equipping the school building or buildings to be built in such district, its estimated time of
completion, the maximum principal amount of the bonds proposed to be issued, the maximum
rate of interest to be paid thereon, and the period over which the bonds to be issued will be
retired, shall have been determined and made public by the board of education of said county,
and the proposed issuance of bonds and increase in the rate of taxation shall have been
authorized by a majority of the qualified electors of such special school district voting upon such
proposal at an election to be called by the county governing body for said purpose, said election
to be held not
less than sixty days after the adoption of this amendment, but at anytime thereafter at the
discretion of the said county governing body. The election provided herein shall be called, held,
conducted and canvassed, and may be contested, as in the case of three mill school tax elections
held pursuant to article 7, chapter 10, Title 52 of the Code of Alabama of 1940. Any bonds issued
pursuant to this amendment shall be payable solely out of the proceeds of said tax which may be
pledged therefor, but said bonds shall constitute negotiable instruments although payable from a
limited source, and said bonds shall be eligible for the investment of trust funds. This amendment
shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 100 100.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***


AMENDMENT 100 RATIFIED 1953

Extension of Debt Limit of Mobile County.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, Mobile county shall continue to have
and possess all of the rights, powers and authority granted to it by amendment XVIII [18] of this
Constitution and shall have and possess the power and authority to become indebted for the
construction or erection of public buildings, bridges and roads within the limit prescribed by
section 224 of this Constitution; provided, however, that all debts incurred or bonds issued by
Mobile county under the provisions of amendments XVIII [18] and XXIX [29] and this
amendment, shall be in addition to the limit fixed by said section 224, and shall not be taken into
account or considered in determining or arriving at the debt limit of Mobile county under said
section 224, and provided further that the six and one-half percent (6 « %) limitation in
amendment XVIII [18] aforesaid shall be construed to refer not to the total amount of
bonds issued under authority of the amendment, but to the total amount of bonds so issued which
may be outstanding at any one time. And provided further, that Mobile county may become
indebted, issue bonds and levy the tax as authorized by and within the limits of amendment
XVIII 18 aforesaid to pay all or part of the cost of the construction or improvement of concrete or
better than concrete surfaced public roads, streets and bridges in Mobile county, including
those within or partly within any municipality, and also for the purpose of constructing,
improving and equipping school buildings in an amount not to exceed $1,000,000 and in an
amount not to exceed $4,000,000 to construct and equip a building or buildings to be used for a
courthouse and jail, including the acquisition of sites therefor; however, in submitting the
question of issuing school bonds and courthouse and jail bonds hereunder, the county governing
body shall
submit the issuance of bonds for such purposes as a single proposition. Courthouse, jail and
school bonds authorized hereby shall be issued in the manner provided in chapter 7 of Title 12 of
the Code of Alabama of 1940 as heretofore or hereafter
amended.

Bonds issued hereunder, together with bonds now or hereafter outstanding under authority of
amendment XVIII [18], together with redemption premiums thereon, shall be payable from any
funds heretofore and hereafter derived from the proceeds of the tax at such rate or rates not
exceeding one-half of one percentum of the assessed value of the property situated in the county
which may from time to time be levied or which has been levied, under said amendment
XVIII [18]. The county governing body may agree in the proceedings authorizing the issue of
school bonds and courthouse and jail bonds hereunder that it will, if and to the extent necessary
to prevent default in the payment of principal or interest on such bonds, use for the payment of
such principal or interest, or both, as a prior lien thereon so much of the proceeds of the tax of 2
«  mills authorized by section 215 of the Constitution as may be necessary. Further, after 30 days
from the first publication in said county of the resolution authorizing and fixing the details of any
bonds authorized to be issued hereunder, such bonds and the sources of payment provided
therefor in such resolution shall be incontestable in any court in this state.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 101 101.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 101 RATIFIED 1953

Special Property Tax for Public School Buildings in Marshall County.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama a
special tax or taxes not to exceed five mills on each dollar's worth of taxable property in Marshall
county is hereby authorized, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for erecting,
constructing, remodeling, renovating, repairing, furnishing and equipping public school
buildings in Marshall county; provided that any tax and the purpose thereof shall have first been
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those
electors participating in the election. The election shall be called, held, conducted and governed
by the applicable provisions of Code of Alabama (1940), Title 52, chapter 10, article 7, which
governs elections on special school taxes and the tax hereby authorized shall be levied and
collected as other special school taxes are levied and collected. If the proposal to levy the tax is
defeated in an election it may not be again submitted to a vote for one year, but after the
expiration of one year, and at intervals of one year thereafter, such question may be resubmitted
to the qualified electors. Should a tax of less than five mills on each dollar's worth of taxable
property be approved at an election thereon then at the expiration of one year from the date of the
election at which such tax was approved, and at intervals of one year thereafter, the question of
levying an additional tax for such purposes may again be submitted to a vote of the qualified
electors of the county until the total of all taxes levied pursuant to the authority hereby conferred
is five mills.

After any tax levied pursuant to authority hereby conferred shall have been collected for five
years the court of county commissioners, board of revenue or other county governing body, upon
receipt of a petition, signed by not less than twenty percent of the qualified electors of the county
must call an election at which the question of repeal of the tax upon payment of all obligations
then outstanding shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the county. Should a majority of
the voters participating at this election vote for the repeal of the tax it shall cease as soon as the
outstanding pledges against it have been paid in full. Should a majority of the electors
participating in the election vote against repeal the question of repeal may not again be submitted
to a vote for one year, but after the expiration of one year, and at intervals of one year thereafter,
upon receipt of a petition signed by twenty percent of the qualified electors of the county, the
county governing body may order the question of repeal of the tax resubmitted to the qualified
electors of the county.

The elections provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed
otherwise in the manner provided by Code of Alabama (1940), Title 52, chapter 10, article 7, for
an election on the special county school tax authorized in amendment III 3 to the Constitution of
Alabama. The collection of the tax shall also be governed by the applicable provisions of the
Code of Alabama (1940), Title 52, chapter 10, article 7, and the proceeds shall be used
exclusively for the purposes authorized at the election approving the levy.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 102 102.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 102 RATIFIED 1953

Special Ad Valorem Tax for School Purposes on Real and Tangible Personal Property within
Chambers County.

In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by law, the governing body of
Chambers county shall have the power to levy and collect, for a period of not exceeding twelve
years, a special ad valorem tax on real and tangible personal property only, situated within said
county, at a rate not exceeding five mills on each dollar's worth of said real and tangible personal
property, as assessed for state taxation for the preceding tax year, the proceeds of said tax to be
used solely for acquiring, constructing and equipping public school buildings within said county,
including public school buildings for any city school system therein; provided, however, that the
special ad valorem tax authorized herein shall be levied only in the event that no other additional
ad valorem tax is authorized to be levied by a constitutional amendment submitted at the 1953
regular session of the legislature; and provided further, that before said special ad valorem tax
shall be levied, the question as to whether said tax shall be levied shall have first been submitted
to a vote of the qualified electors of said county at an election to be called by the governing body
of said county, and shall have been voted for by a majority of said qualified electors voting at
said election. The election provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted and canvassed,
and may be contested in the same manner as provided by law for the calling, holding, conducting
and canvassing of county bond elections. Upon the expiration of any tax authorized pursuant to
this amendment, no further tax shall be authorized hereunder.

In the event the said special ad valorem tax shall be authorized by a majority of the qualified
electors voting on said question at said election, the governing body of said county shall
thereupon be authorized to sell and issue its tax anticipation bonds for the purposes for which
said tax was authorized, which bonds shall be in such amount as the governing body of said
county shall designate, and shall be subject to the provisions of the general laws pertaining to the
issuance of county bonds except that no further election shall be required therefor. The revenue
derived from the sale of said bonds shall be expended by the Chambers county board of
education for the purposes stated herein. Any bonds issued pursuant to this amendment shall be
payable solely out of the proceeds of the said special ad valorem tax hereby authorized, which
shall be pledged therefor, and after the issuance of said bonds, the proceeds of said tax remaining
after payment of the cost of assessment and collection shall be used only for payment of the
principal of and interest on said bonds, the creation and maintenance of a reserve therefor, and
the redemption thereof. Said bonds shall constitute negotiable instruments although payable from
a limited source and shall be eligible for the investment of trust funds. The said bonds shall not
constitute general obligations of the said county and shall be in addition to all other bonds which
said county has heretofore issued or is authorized to issue under the Constitution and laws of
Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 103 103.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1953 ***

AMENDMENT 103 RATIFIED 1953

Costs and Charges of Courts and the Offices, Terms, and Compensation of Officers of Chambers
County.

The legislature may from time to time by general or local laws applicable to or operative in
Chambers county fix, alter, and regulate the costs and charges of court, and the fees,
commissions, percentages, allowances, or salary of, any officer of Chambers county; may
provide the method and basis of compensation of such officers; may fix the terms of office of
such
officers; and may consolidate any of the offices held by such officers. When any such officer is
compensated on a salary basis the legislature may provide for the distribution of the fees,
commissions, percentages, and allowances collectible by him, and the funds from which the
salary of the officer shall be paid, any other provision of this Constitution to the contrary
notwithstanding.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 104 104.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 104 RATIFIED 1954

Economic Development of Municipalities of Haleyville and Double Springs.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, the municipalities of Haleyville and Double Springs in Winston county shall
have full and continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do
any one or more of the following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described
in subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipalities of
Haleyville and Double Springs, or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in the municipalities of Haleyville and Double
Springs, or upon all property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such
municipality shall describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited
by any proposed use or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body, and subject to such limitations as the governing bodies of the
municipalities of Haleyville or Double Springs may impose, by approving and filing a certificate
to that effect in the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective
successors in function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or
governing body all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon the municipalities.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance, of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of the municipalities of Haleyville and Double
Springs for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the county under section 225 of
the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in section 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth. 

10 The municipalities of Haleyville and Double Springs shall not make any engagement or
commitment or undertake any project under the provisions hereof unless and until the
proposition has been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the respective
municipality. The governing body of each of the two municipalities may provide for holding such
elections, but in no case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of the
proposition to be voted on has been published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 105 105.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 105 RATIFIED 1954

Costs and Charges of Courts in Madison County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Madison county, and the method of disbursement thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 106 106.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 106 RATIFIED 1954

Additional Taxes in Morgan County for Public School Purposes.

Each school district in Morgan county, shall have power to levy and collect additional taxes on
the taxable property located in the district of not to exceed $.55 per $100 worth of taxable
property located in the district for public school purposes; provided, that the total of special
county and school district taxes levied in the district for public school purposes under section 260
of this Constitution and all amendments to this Constitution including the present amendment
shall not exceed a rate of $1.25 per $100 worth of taxable property located in the district, except
that in determining whether the said rate of $1.25 per $100 will be exceeded there shall be
excluded from such calculation taxes levied and collected under the authority of any amendment
to this Constitution wherein it is stated that the adoption thereof will not affect the power, right
or authority to levy special school taxes; provided further, that the adoption of this amendment
shall in nowise limit, modify, abridge, or impair the power, authority or right of counties,
municipalities, or school districts to levy and collect special school taxes or taxes of any kind for
schools or school purposes vested in and conferred upon them, or any of them, by this
Constitution, any amendment thereto, or any provisions of state law, or to make
appropriations for schools or school purposes.

A school district within the meaning of this amendment shall include school districts which
consist of incorporated cities or towns, or any school district of which an incorporated city or
town is a part or such other school districts now existing or hereafter formed as may be approved
by the county board of education.

The rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the district and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election.

The funds derived from the tax levied in any school district under this amendment shall be
expended for the exclusive benefit of the district.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 107 107.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 107 RATIFIED 1954

Issuance of Revenue Bonds and Other Revenue Securities by Municipalities.

Revenue bonds and other revenue securities at any time issued by a municipality for the purpose
of extending, enlarging or improving any water, sewer, gas or electric system then owned by such
municipality shall not be deemed to constitute bonds or indebtedness of such municipality within
the meaning of sections 222 and 225 of this Constitution if by their terms such bonds or other
securities are not made a charge on the general credit or tax revenues of the issuing municipality
and are made payable solely out of revenues derived from the operation of any one or more of
such systems.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 108 108.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 108 RATIFIED 1954

Bonds and Other Securities Issued by Certain Public Corporations.

Each public corporation heretofore or hereafter organized or created in this state pursuant to
authorization or determination by any municipality or municipalities, or county or counties, or
the governing body of any one or more thereof, shall for the purposes of sections 222, 224, and
225 of this Constitution be deemed to be a separate entity from such municipality or
municipalities, or county or counties. Bonds and other securities heretofore or hereafter issued by
any public corporation so organized shall not be deemed to constitute bonds or indebtedness
within the meaning of said sections even though property, whether or not capable of producing
income, may have been transferred to such public corporation by any one or more of such
municipalities or counties either with or without the payment of pecuniary or other consideration.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 109 109.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 109 RATIFIED 1954

Exempting Blind and Deaf Persons from Payment of Poll Tax.

No person who is either blind or deaf shall be required to pay the poll tax specified in the
Constitution as a prerequisite to voting in Alabama; but, on the contrary, every blind or deaf
person shall be exempt from the payment of all poll taxes which have accrued and have not been
paid or which hereafter may accrue. The term "blind person" as used herein includes any
person who has a vision with or without adjusted glasses suitable to the eye or to the individual
not greater than what is known as 2/100 vision. The term "deaf person" as used herein means any
person who is wholly deprived of his sense of hearing. The judge of probate shall issue a
certificate of exemption to any person exempt from the payment of poll tax by reason of this
amendment. This amendment shall be self-executing and retroactive; but the legislature may
enact laws designed to carry out the purposes of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 110 110.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1954 ***

AMENDMENT 110 RATIFIED 1954

Filling Vacancy in Office of Judge of Jefferson County Circuit Court.

Any vacancy occurring in the office of judge of the tenth judicial circuit comprised of Jefferson
county only, which is requiredto be filled by appointment on nominations made by a judicial
commission, shall be made within ninety days from the date of the submission of such
nominations. In the event the governor fails to fill the vacancy from such nominations within
such period, the appointment shall be made by the chief justice of the supreme court of Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 111 270.0 014.0 0 AL 1901 1956 ***

AMENDMENT 111 RATIFIED 1956

Amendment of Sections 137, 139, 256, 258, 259, 260, 269, 270.

SECTION 270

Applicability of article to Mobile county.

The provisions of this article and of any act of the legislature passed in pursuance thereof for
educational purposes, shall apply to Mobile county only so far as to authorize and require the
authorities designated by law to draw the portions of the funds to which said county shall be
entitled for school purposes and to make reports to the superintendent of education as
may be prescribed by law; and all special incomes and powers of taxation as now authorized by
law for the benefit of public schools in said county shall remain undisturbed until otherwise
provided by the legislature.

NOTE

Code Commissioner's note

Acts 1988, 1st Ex. Sess., No. 88-868 provides: "Notwithstanding the provisions of any law to the
contrary, all special taxes levied for any school purpose or school purposes generally, including
taxes levied under the provisions of Section 269 or Amendments No. 3 or 111 of the Constitution
of Alabama of 1901, or the provisions of Title 52, Section 235 of the Code of Alabama 1940, or
Section 16-13-108 of the Code of Alabama 1975, or the predecessor or successor of either
thereof, which special taxes were approved by an election at which a majority of the votes were
cast in favor of said tax, are ratified, confirmed and validated for the term approved by the voters,
including any term in excess of 30 years. Any such special tax heretofore levied for a period in
excess of 30 years is given effect as if the term approved by the voters had been authorized
on the date of such election. All warrants heretofore or hereafter issued as preferred claims
against such special taxes shall be entitled to a claim against such taxes of the period approved by
the voters."

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 112 094.0 004.0 0 AL 1901 1956 ***

AMENDMENT 112 RATIFIED 1956

Amendment of Section 94.

SECTION 94

Counties, municipalities and other political subdivisions not to grant public money or lend credit
to individuals or corporations; alienation of public parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and
housing projects by political subdivisions and public bodies.

The legislature shall not have power to authorize any county, city, town, or other subdivision of
this state to lend its credit, or to grant public money or thing of value in aid of, or to any
individual, association, or corporation whatsoever, or to become a stockholder in any such
corporation, association, or company, by issuing bonds or otherwise. It is provided, however, that
the legislature may enact general, special, or local laws authorizing political subdivisions and
public bodies to alienate, with or without a valuable consideration, public parks and playgrounds,
or other public recreational facilities and public housing projects, conditional upon the approval
of a majority of the duly qualified electors of the county, city, town, or other
subdivision affected thereby, voting at an election held for such purpose.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 113 113.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1956 ***

AMENDMENT 113 RATIFIED 1956

Bond Issue for Building Construction and Improvement Purpose at Alabama State Hospitals and
Partlow State School for Mental Deficients.

The state is authorized to become indebted for building construction and improvement purposes
at the Alabama State Hospitals and at the Partlow State School for Mental Deficients, and in
evidence of the indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue, in addition to all other bonds of the
state, interest bearing general obligation bonds of the state not exceeding four million dollars in
principal amount. The bonds shall be general obligations of the state of Alabama and the full
faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the prompt and faithful
payment of the principal of the bonds and the interest thereon. The proceeds from the sale of such
bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used exclusively for the acquisition of building sites;
for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, and improvement of building facilities, including
renewal and replacement of structural parts; and for the procurement of equipment for such
buildings at the Alabama State Hospitals and at the Partlow State School for Mental Deficients;
provided that the expenses incurred in connection with the sale and issuance of the bonds may
also be paid from such proceeds.

All bonds issued hereunder and the interest thereon shall be payable from any funds in the state
treasury not otherwise appropriated. The bonds shall be payable in substantially equal
installments of principal and interest beginning in the next fiscal year after their date. They shall
bear interest at a rate not to exceed three percent, and they shall contain a provision for their call
for payment at such a time or times prior to maturity, and at such a premium, if any, as may be
prescribed in the
notice of sale. All bonds issued hereunder shall be sold to the best bidder at a duly advertised
public sale, upon sealed bids or at auction, and shall not be sold for less than par and accrued
interest; provided, however, that bidders may be invited to name the rate or rates of interest
which the bonds are to bear. The right to reject any or all bids shall be reserved. Bonds issued
hereunder shall mature within twenty years from the date of issuance.

The legislature shall adopt appropriate enabling legislation to carry out the intent and purpose of
this amendment to the Constitution.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 114 114.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1956 ***

AMENDMENT 114 RATIFIED 1956

Bond Issue to Assist in Construction and Equipment of Hospitals, etc.

(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution of the state of Alabama, or any
amendment thereto heretofore adopted, the governor shall from time to time issue negotiable
interest-bearing bonds for the purposes and in the manner and subject to the limitation stated in
this amendment. The bonds shall be general obligations of the state of Alabama and the full
faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the punctual payment of the
bonds and the interest thereon. The aggregate principal amount of all bonds issued hereunder
shall not exceed two million dollars ($2,000,000) and they shall mature within ten years from the
date of issuance.

The proceeds from the sale of such bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used solely for the
construction and equipping of hospitals, health centers, tuberculosis hospitals or sanatoria, and
related medical facilities pursuant to Act No. 211, General Acts of Alabama 1945, page 330,
approved July 7, 1945; and Act 287, General Acts of Alabama 1945, page 474, approved July 7,
1945; and Act No. 46, General and Local Acts 1949, page 68, approved June 2, 1949; as
said acts are now or may hereafter be amended; and such facilities established and operated by
the corporate authorities of a city or town, or a county governing body under the provision of
Title 22, section 189, Code of Alabama 1940, as same is now or may hereafter be amended; or
any act supplemental thereto or amendatory thereof. The funds provided hereby shall be used
only for construction and equipping facilities under contracts which have been or are let on or
after July 1, 1955; shall be used to match federal funds available for hospital health center, and
related medical facilities provided under Public Law 725, 79th Congress and Public Law 482,
83rd Congress, as said Public Laws are now or may hereafter be amended; and the local
governments in the area where each hospital, health center, tuberculosis hospitals or sanatoria, or
related medical facility is to be constructed or equipped shall contribute at least as much money
for the construction and equipping as does the state; and provided further that the state shall not
contribute more than two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000) to the construction and
equipping of any tuberculosis hospital or sanatoria and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
for any other facility included within the scope of this amendment.

In determining where a hospital, health center, tuberculosis hospitals or sanatoria, or related
medical facility to be constructed with funds appropriated herein shall be located, consideration
shall be given to the communities on the basis of relative need. Each county having no hospital,
health center, tuberculosis hospitals or sanatoria, or related medical facility shall have first
priority. Counties receiving prior allotments hereunder shall not be precluded from receiving an
additional allotment for other facilities at the discretion of the state board of health. A sum not to
exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000) may be used by the state board of health from the
proceeds of the sale of said bonds for administering the provision of this amendment.

(b) All bonds issued hereunder and the interest thereon shall be payable from any funds in the
state treasury not otherwise appropriated. The bonds shall be payable in substantially equal
installments of principal and interest beginning in the next fiscal year after their date; they shall
bear interest at a rate not to exceed 2 «  % and they shall contain a provision for their
call for payment at such a time or times prior to maturity, and at such a premium, if any, as the
governor may prescribe in the notice of sale. All bonds issued hereunder shall be sold to the best
bidder at a duly advertised public sale, on sealed bids or at auction, and shall not be sold for less
than par and accrued interest; provided, bidders may be invited to name the rate or rates of
interest, which the bonds are to bear. The right to reject any or all bids shall be reserved.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 115 115.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1956 ***

AMENDMENT 115 RATIFIED 1956

Extension of Debt Limit of Tuscaloosa County.

Tuscaloosa county may become indebted, and in evidence of such indebtedness may sell and
issue its interest-bearing bonds, to the extent of not exceeding $2,500,000.00 in principal
amount, for the purpose of constructing and equipping a county courthouse and jail in said
county and acquiring land therefor; provided, that before any such bonds shall be issued the
question of whether said bonds shall be issued shall have first been submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of said county at an election to be called for that purpose by the governing body
of said county and the issuance of said bonds shall have been authorized by a majority of said
qualified electors voting at said election. The elections provided for herein shall be called, held,
conducted and canvassed, and may be contested, in the manner provided by law for the calling,
holding, conducting, canvassing and contesting of county bond elections, and if the issuance of
said bonds shall be authorized at any such election they may be sold and issued from time to time
in the manner provided by law for the authorization and sale of county bonds. In the event the
voters of Tuscaloosa county do not authorize the issuance and sale of said bonds at any election
called hereunder then other elections may be called by the governing body of Tuscaloosa county
from time to time until the voters of Tuscaloosa county do authorize the issuance and sale of said
bonds; provided that no two elections shall be held within one year of each other. Provided
further that if the majority of the voters of Tuscaloosa county participating in the election as to
the adoption of this constitutional amendment vote for such adoption of this amendment then this
expression of the voters of Tuscaloosa county for this amendment shall of itself authorize the
issue and sale of said bonds and then no additional election by the voters of Tuscaloosa county
shall be required to authorize the issue and sale of said bonds and such bonds may be issued and
sold as the full obligation of Tuscaloosa county without an additional election. In the event the
voters of Tuscaloosa county do not authorize the issuance and sale of said bonds at any such
elections herein referred to, authorized or called hereunder then other special elections shall be
called by the governing body of Tuscaloosa county from time to time until the voters of
Tuscaloosa county do authorize the issuance and sale of said bonds; provided that no two special
elections shall be held within one year of each other except the first special election herein
provided for; and provided further that such special elections shall be held at least once every two
years until said bonds are authorized. When authorized said bonds shall be promptly sold and
such courthouse and jail shall forthwith be built. Tuscaloosa county shall and is hereby
specifically authorized to acquire adequate lands for said courthouse and jail and approaches and
parking spaces. Such courthouse and jail may be built as one building or as separate buildings as
the
governing body of Tuscaloosa county may determine and shall be properly and adequately
equipped and furnished. The indebtedness herein authorized shall be in addition to all other
indebtedness authorized prior to the adoption of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 116 116.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 116 RATIFIED 1957

State Works of Internal Improvement Along Navigable Waterways and Indebtedness Therefor.

In addition to the authority heretofore granted it by section 93 of this Constitution as amended,
and notwithstanding the provisions of section 213 of this Constitution as amended, and when
authorized by appropriate laws passed by the legislature, the state may, at a cost of not exceeding
an additional ten million dollars engage in works of internal improvement by promoting,
developing, constructing, maintaining and operating along navigable streams or waterways now
or hereafter existing within the state all manner of docks, facilities, elevators, warehouses, water
and rail terminals and other structures and facilities and improvements needful for the convenient
use of the same, in aid of commerce and use of the waterways of the state; provided that any such
work or improvements shall always be and remain under the management and control of the state
through the Alabama state docks department or other state governing agency. When authorized
by appropriate laws passed by the legislature, the state may become indebted in an aggregate
principal amount of not exceeding $10,000,000 for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this amendment and may cause to be issued its general direct obligation bonds for the repayment
of such indebtedness and interest thereon and pledge the faith and credit of the state thereto.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 117 117.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 117 RATIFIED 1957

Bonds for Construction and Improvement Purposes at Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind.

The state is authorized to become indebted and to issue interest bearing bonds, in addition to
those heretofore authorized and sold, in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $3,000,000.
The proceeds derived from the sale of said bonds shall be used solely for the purpose of paying
the expenses incurred in the sale and issuance thereof and for the acquisition of sites for and the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement and equipment of building facilities,
including the renewal or replacement of structural parts, at the Alabama Institute for Deaf and
Blind. Said bonds shall be sold only at a duly advertised public sale or sales, upon sealed bids or
at auction, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net interest cost to the state for the bonds
offered for sale, and shall be sold at not less than their face value plus accrued interest thereon.
Said bonds shall be direct general obligations of the state and for the prompt and faithful
payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon the full faith and credit of the state are
hereby irrevocably pledged. In addition thereto, there is hereby specially and irrevocably pledged
for payment of the principal of and interest on said bonds, pro rata and without priority of one
bond over another by reason of prior issuance or otherwise, so much as may be necessary for said
purpose of those portions of the state sales tax and the state use tax in effect at the date of the
adoption of this amendment which are required by law at the date of the adoption of this
amendment to be paid into the Alabama special educational trust fund. The said special pledge
shall create a charge on the tax proceeds herein specially pledged prior to all other charges or
expenses for educational or any other purposes whatsoever; provided, that in the event any other
bonds should be issued under the authority of any other amendment to the Constitution proposed
by the 1957 regular session of the legislature, or by any public corporation created pursuant to
any statute enacted at said session, for payment of the principal of and interest on which the said
taxes or any portion thereof should be pledged in such other constitutional amendment or in
or pursuant to authority of such statute, then the special pledge of the said taxes herein made
shall be on a parity with the pledge or pledges of said taxes or portion thereof for the benefit of
such other bonds. The bonds issued under this amendment and the income therefrom shall be
exempt from all taxation in the state of Alabama. The provisions of section 261 of the
Constitution of Alabama shall not be deemed to apply to the tax proceeds so specially pledged or
to the
proceeds from any bonds issued hereunder. The legislature shall adopt appropriate enabling
legislation to carry out the intent and purpose of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 118 118.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 118 RATIFIED 1957

Increasing Rate of Interest and Other Matters Relating to Bonds Authorized Under Amendment
No. 113.

Bonds which may be issued for building construction and improvement purposes at Alabama
State Hospitals and at Partlow State School for Mental Deficients, under the provisions of the
amendment to the Constitution which was proposed by Act No. 37 adopted at the First Special
Session of the Legislature of 1956 [1956, 1st Ex. Sess., p. 63] and which was ratified by the
electors at the general election held on November 6, 1956 amendment No. 113, may be
sold, executed and delivered from time to time in series, may bear such date or dates, and may
bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding four and one-half per centum per annum payable
semiannually and evidenced in such manner, all as may be provided at the respective times of the
sales thereof. The maturities of the bonds of each series shall, to such extent as may be
practicable, be so arranged that the first maturity of the bonds of each series shall be not later
than one year after the date thereof and the last maturity of the bonds of that series shall be not
later than twenty years after the date thereof, and the said maturities shall be so arranged that
during each then succeeding fiscal year of the state the aggregate installments of principal and
interest that will mature on all bonds that will be outstanding under said amendment,
immediately following the issuance of the bonds of that series, will be substantially equal;
provided, that the determination in the proceedings under which the bonds are issued that the
requirements of this sentence have been complied with shall be conclusive of such compliance
and the purchasers of any of the bonds and all subsequent holders thereof shall be fully protected
by such determination.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 119 119.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 119 RATIFIED

Bonds for Construction and Improvement Purposes at University of Alabama Medical Center.

The state of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for building, construction and improved
purposes at the University of Alabama Medical Center, in Birmingham, and in evidence of the
indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue, in addition to all other bonds of the state,
interest-bearing general obligation bonds of the state not exceeding four million five hundred
thousand dollars in principal amount. The bonds shall be general obligations of the State of
Alabama and the full faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the
prompt and faithful payment of the principal of the bonds and the interest thereon. The proceeds
from the sale of such bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used exclusively for the
acquisition of lands adjacent to the University of Alabama Medical Center, in Birmingham, and
to provide funds to be used to match federal funds granted by the National Institute of Health of
the United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare for construction and equipment
of a medical research building and to match federal funds granted under the Hill-Burton Act for
the construction and equipment of a nurses' home at the medical center; provided that the
expenses
incurred in connection with the sale and issuance of the bonds may also be paid from such
proceeds.

The board of trustees of the University of Alabama is hereby vested with full authority, except as
limited herein, to provide the terms of the bonds and to provide for the sale and issuance thereof.
The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time, may be in
such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities, may bear
such date or dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as to principal or interest or both
with
rights of conversion into another form, may be payable in such installments and at such place or
places, may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may
contain provisions for redemption at the option of the state to be exercised by said board at such
date or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as
shall be provided by the said board in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds are
issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature in annual installments in such amounts
as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the said board under which they are
issued, the first of which installments shall mature not later than one year after the date of the
bonds of such series and the last of which installments shall mature not later than twenty years
after the
date of the bonds of the same series. When each series of bonds is issued, the maturities of the
bonds of that series shall, to such extent as may be practicable, be so arranged that during each
then succeeding fiscal year of the state the aggregate
installments of principal and interest that will mature on all bonds that will be outstanding
hereunder, immediately following the issuance of the bonds of that series, will be substantially
equal; provided, that the determination by the said board that the requirements of this sentence
have been complied with shall be conclusive of such compliance and the purchasers of the
bonds with respect to which such determination is made and all subsequent holders thereof shall
be fully protected thereby. None of the bonds shall be sold for less than face value plus accrued
interest thereon to the date of delivery, and all of the bonds shall be sold only at public sale or
sales, either on sealed bids or at public auction, after such advertisement as may be prescribed by
the said board, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net interest cost to the state computed
to the respective maturities of the bonds sold; provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the
said board is received all bids may be rejected. 

The bonds shall be signed in the name of the state by the governor and countersigned by the
president pro tempore of the board of trustees of the University of Alabama and the great seal of
the state of Alabama or a facsimile thereof shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced
thereon and shall be attested by the signature of the secretary of state; provided that facsimile
signatures of any one or any two (but not all) of said officers may be reproduced on such bonds
in lieu of their manually signing the same. Coupons attached to the bonds and representing
installments of interest thereon shall be signed with the facsimile signature of the state treasurer,
which facsimile signature is hereby adopted as due and sufficient authentication of said coupons.

All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from taxation in this state.

The proceeds from the sale of bonds hereby authorized, after the payment of all expenses of the
sale thereof shall be set apart in a special trust fund in the state treasury to be designated The
University of Alabama Medical Center Bond Fund; and such proceeds shall be used solely for the
purposes, hereinabove enumerated, for which the bonds are authorized to be issued; provided
that the plans and specifications for any building constructed with moneys from said special fund
shall be approved by the Alabama building commission or any agency designated by the
legislature as its successor.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and no further authorization from the
legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any bonds issued hereunder.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 120 120.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 120 RATIFIED 1957

Bonds for Construction and Improvement Purposes at The Alabama Polytechnic Institute.

The state of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for building, construction and
improvement purposes at The Alabama Polytechnic Institute at Auburn, and in evidence of the
indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue, in addition to all other bonds of the state, interest
bearing general obligation bonds of the state not exceeding four million five hundred
thousand dollars ($4,500,000) in principal amount. The bonds shall be general obligations of the
state of Alabama and the full faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to
the prompt and faithful payment of the principal of the bonds and the interest thereon. The
proceeds from the sale of any such bonds shall, after payment of the expenses of their issuance,
be set apart in a special fund in the state treasury to be designated "The Alabama Polytechnic
Institute Building Bond Fund"; and such proceeds shall be used exclusively for the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, and improvement of college building facilities, including the
acquisition of sites and equipment for such facilities, for use by the School of Agriculture, the
Agricultural Experiment Station, and the School of Veterinary Medicine of The Alabama
Polytechnic Institute at Auburn; provided, that the plans and specifications for any building
constructed with money from said special fund shall be approved by the Alabama building
commission or any agency designated by the legislature as its successor.

The board of trustees of The Alabama Polytechnic Institute is hereby vested with full authority,
except as limited herein, to provide the terms of the bonds and to provide for the sale and
issuance thereof. The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to
time, may be in such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and
maturities, may bear such date or dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as to principal
or interest or both
with rights of conversion into another form, may be payable in such installments and at such
place or places, may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and
may contain provisions for redemption at the option of the state to be exercised by said board at
such date or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices,
all as shall be provided by the said board in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds
are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature in annual installments in such
amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the said board under which they
are issued, the first of which installments shall mature not later than one year after the date of the
bonds of such series and the last of which installments shall mature not later than twenty years
after
the date of the bonds of the same series. When each series of bonds is issued, the maturities of
the bonds of that series shall, to such extent as may be practicable, be so arranged that during
each then succeeding fiscal year of the state the aggregate installments of principal and interest
that will mature on all bonds that will be outstanding hereunder, immediately following the
issuance of the bonds of that series, will be substantially equal; provided, that the determination
by the said board that the requirements of this sentence have been complied with shall be
conclusive of such compliance and the purchasers of the bonds with respect to which such
determination is made and all subsequent holders thereof shall be fully protected by such
determination. None of the bonds shall be sold for less than face value plus accrued interest
thereon to the date of delivery,
and all of the bonds shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public
auction, after such advertisement as may be prescribed by the said board, to the bidder whose bid
reflects the lowest net interest cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the bonds
sold; provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the said board is received all bids may be
rejected.

The bonds shall be signed in the name of the state by the governor and countersigned by the
president pro tempore of the board of trustees of The Alabama Polytechnic Institute, and the
great seal of the state of Alabama or a facsimile thereof shall be impressed, printed or otherwise
reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature of the secretary of state;
provided, that facsimile signatures of any one or any two (but not all) of said officers may be
reproduced on any of such bonds in lieu of being manually signed thereon. Coupons attached to
the bonds and representing installments of interest thereon shall be signed with the facsimile
signature of the state treasurer, which facsimile signature shall constitute due and sufficient
authentication of said coupons.

All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from taxation in this state.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and authorization from or other action
of the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 121 121.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 121 RATIFIED 1957

Increasing Rate of Interest and Other Matters Relating to Bonds Issued Under Amendment No.
114.

Except as hereinafter limited, bonds which may be issued under the provisions of the amendment
to the Constitution which was proposed by Act No. 125 adopted at the First Special Session of
the Legislature of 1956 1956, [1st Ex. Sess., p. 179] and which was ratified by the electors at the
general election held on November 6, 1956, and proclaimed ratified on November 15, 1956
amendment No. 114, may be executed and delivered from time to time in such forms,
denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities, may bear such date or
dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as to principal and interest or both with rights of
conversion into another form, may bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding 4% per annum
payable semiannually and payable and evidenced in such manner, may contain provisions for
redemption at the option of the state at such date or dates prior to their maturity and upon
payment of such redemption price or prices, and may contain such other terms and conditions not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof, all as may be provided in the order of the governor
providing for the issuance thereof which shall be made at the time of each sale of any of said
bonds. The principal of each series of said bonds shall mature in annual installments in
such amounts as shall be specified in the order under which they are issued, the first of which
installments shall mature not later than one year after the date of the bonds of such series and the
last of which installments shall mature not later than ten years after the date of the bonds of the
same series. When each series of said bonds is issued, the maturities of the bonds of
that series shall, to such extent as may be practicable, be so arranged that during any then
succeeding fiscal year of the state the aggregate installments of principal and interest that will
mature on all of the said bonds that will be outstanding hereunder,
immediately following the issuance of the bonds of that series, will be substantially equal;
provided, that the determination in the order under which the bonds of such series are issued that
the requirements of this sentence have been complied with shall be conclusive of such
compliance and the purchasers of the bonds with respect to which such determination is made
and all subsequent holders thereof shall be fully protected thereby. None of the said bonds shall
be sold for less than face value plus accrued interest to the date of delivery, and all of the said
bonds shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public auction, after
advertisement in a financial journal published in New York City at least one time not less than
ten days prior to the date fixed for the sale, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net interest
cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the bonds sold; provided, that if no bid
deemed acceptable by the governor is received all bids may be rejected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 122 122.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 122 RATIFIED 1957

Bonds of Mobile County for Public School Buildings.

Mobile county is hereby authorized to become indebted for school building purposes and in
evidence of the indebtedness so incurred, to sell and issue, in addition to all other bonds of the
county, interest bearing bonds of the county not exceeding three million dollars ($;3,000,000) in
principal amount.

The bonds issued hereunder, together with the bonds now or hereafter outstanding under
authority of amendment XVIII [18], proposed by Acts 1923, page 594, and proclaimed ratified
November 15, 1924 (Proclamation Record D., page 107) and amendment C, proposed by Acts
1953, page 436, and proclaimed ratified December 28, 1953 (Proclamation Record, Volume I,
page 144), together with redemption premiums thereon, shall be payable from any funds
heretofore and hereafter derived from the proceeds of the tax at such rate or rates not exceeding
one-half of one per centum of the assessed value of the property situated in the county which may
from time to time be levied and which has been levied under amendment XVIII [18] and also
from the proceeds of any tax or taxes levied under this amendment; and the board of revenue and
road commissioners or other governing body of Mobile county is hereby vested with full
authority
to continue to levy a tax in the amount authorized by said amendment XVIII [18], until all bonds
issued pursuant to this amendment have been paid in full, or provision for such payment made,
without again submitting the question of levying such tax and issuing such bonds to the qualified
voters of Mobile county.

The proceeds from each sale of any of the bonds shall, after payment of the expenses of issuing
the same, be covered into the county treasury and set apart therein in a special trust fund to be
designated the "Public School Bond Fund." The money paid into such fund shall be disbursed to
the custodian of county school funds, and shall be used solely for the acquisition of public school
sites, for the construction, reconstruction, alteration and improvement of public school building
facilities, for the procurement of equipment therefor, and for payment of obligations incurred for
any of such purposes in Mobile county.

The board of revenue and road commissioners or other governing body of Mobile county is
hereby vested with full authority except as limited herein, to provide the terms of the bonds and
to provide for the sale and issuance thereof; and such county governing body is hereby
specifically authorized to pledge to the payment of such bonds so much of the proceeds of any
tax
hereinbefore or hereafter levied pursuant to amendment XVIII [18], which has not already been
pledged to the payment of other bonds of the county, and so much of the proceeds of any tax
levied pursuant to this amendment as are needed for the payment of the bonds hereby authorized.
The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time, may be in
such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities, may bear
such date or dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as to principal or interest or both
with rights of conversion into another form, may be payable in such installments and at such
place or places, may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and
may contain provisions for redemption at the option of Mobile county to be exercised by said
board of revenue and road commissioners or other governing body of Mobile county at such date
or
dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as shall be
provided by said county governing body in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds
are issued. The principal of each series of bonds shall mature in annual installments in such
amounts as shall be specified in the resolution or resolutions of the said county governing body
under which they were issued, the first of which installments shall mature not later than one year
after the date of the bonds of such series and the last of which installments shall mature not later
than twenty-five years after the date of the bonds of the same series. When each series of bonds is
issued, the maturities of the bonds of that series shall, to such extent as may be practicable, be so
arranged that during each then succeeding fiscal year of the county the aggregate installments of
principal and interest that will mature on all bonds that will be outstanding hereunder,
immediately following the issuance of the bonds of that series, will be substantially equal;
provided, that the determination by the said county governing body that the requirements of this
sentence have been complied with shall be conclusive of such compliance and the purchasers of
the bonds with respect to which such determination is made and all subsequent holders thereof
shall be fully protected by such determination. None of the bonds shall be sold for less than face
value plus accrued interest thereon to the date of delivery, and all of the bonds shall be sold only
at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public auction, after such advertisement as may
be prescribed by the said county governing body, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net
interest cost to the county computed to the respective maturities of the bonds sold; provided, that
if no bid deemed acceptable by the said county governing body is received all bids may be
rejected.

The bonds shall be signed in the name of the county of Mobile by the chairman of the board of
revenue and road commissioner or other presiding officer of the county governing body and shall
be countersigned by the county treasurer, and the seal of the county, if any, or a facsimile thereof,
shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced thereon and shall be attested by the signature
of the clerk of the county governing body; provided that a facsimile of the signature of any
one or any two (but not all) of the officers whose signatures appear on the bonds may be
reproduced on any of the bonds in lieu of being manually signed thereon. Any coupons attached
to the bonds and representing installments of interest thereon shall be signed with the facsimile
signature of the chairman of the county governing body, which facsimile signature shall
constitute sufficient authentication of said coupons.

All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
therefrom, shall forever be exempt from all taxation in this state.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or other action
by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder; provided,
however, that the legislature may enact appropriate legislation, not inconsistent with this
amendment, respecting the use of the proceeds from the bonds and providing for the
payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 123 123.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 123 RATIFIED 1957

Special School District Taxes in Cleburne County.

In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of
Alabama, the several school districts or Cleburne county shall have the power to levy and collect
a special district tax of fifty cents ($.50) on each one hundred dollars ($100) worth of taxable
property in such districts for public school purposes; provided, that the time during which such
tax is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified
electors in each such district and voted for by a majority of those voting at such election, the
election to be held in the same manner as now provided by law for an election on the school
district tax authorized in article XIX of the Constitution of Alabama. The funds arising from such
special tax levied in any district which votes the same independently of the county shall be
expended for the exclusive benefit of the district, as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 124 124.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 124 RATIFIED 1957

Special School Tax in Russell County; Tax Anticipation Bonds.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama,
Russell county shall have the power to levy and collect a special county-wide school tax of eight
mills on each dollar's worth of taxable property in Russell county, the proceeds of which shall be
used exclusively for public school purposes; provided that such tax and the purpose or purposes
thereof, and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to the
vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those voting at such
election. The special tax provided for herein may be renewed from time to time, in the manner
provided herein, for such periods of time as are necessary. If any proposal to levy the tax is
defeated in any election, subsequent elections thereon may be held at any time. The elections
provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the
manner provided for an election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article
XIX of the Constitution of Alabama, by article7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940).
The county tax collector shall collect the tax in the same manner andunder the same requirements
and laws as the taxes of the state are collected, and he shall keep the proceeds of this tax
separate and apart from all other funds, and shall keep clear accounts thereof. The tax collector
shall distribute the proceedsof this special tax in such manner as to turn over to the custodian of
the county school funds of Russell county the revenuederived from the tax levied on all taxable
property situated outside the corporate limits of Phenix City, such revenues to beused by the
county board of education for educational purposes in connection with schools located or to be
located outside the corporate limits of Phenix City, and to turn over to the custodian of school
funds of the city school system of Phenix City the revenue derived from the tax levied on all
taxable property situated within the corporate limits of Phenix City, such revenues to be used by
the city board of education for educational purposes in connection with schools located or to be
located within the corporate limits of Phenix City.

In the event that any special property tax authorized herein shall be authorized by a majority of
the qualified electors voting on the question at the election, the county board of education of
Russell county and the city board of education of Phenix City may, at such times as to them seem
necessary and proper, sell and issue their tax anticipation bonds for the purposes for which the
tax was authorized, which bonds shall be in such amounts as the respective board of education
shall designate and, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be subject to the provisions of the
general laws now pertaining to the issuance by county and city boards of education of capital
outlay warrants, and no further election shall be required for the issuance of such bonds. The
revenue derived from the sale of these bonds shall be expended by the county board of
education and the Phenix City board of education for public school purposes only. Any bonds
issued under the authority of this amendment shall be payable solely out of the proceeds of the
special property tax hereby authorized, all or any part of which may be pledged therefor. The
bonds issued under the authority of this amendment shall constitute negotiable instruments,
although payable from a limited source, and shall be eligible for the investment of trust funds.
The bonds shall not constitute general obligations of the county and shall be in addition to all
other bonds or warrants which the county or city boards of education have heretofore issued or
are authorized to issue under the Constitution and laws of Alabama.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 125 125.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 125 RATIFIED 1957

Use of Certain Special County Taxes for Hospital Care and Treatment of Indigent Residents.

The legislature may authorize the use of any portion of the proceeds of any special county tax
levied for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, and maintaining public
hospitals, public clinics, public health centers, and related public health facilities of any kind, or
for any one or more of the purposes included within the meaning of the term "public hospital
purposes," for the purpose of providing hospital care and treatment for indigent residents of the
county, or for the purpose of matching any state or federal funds made available for use in
providing hospital care and treatment for indigent residents of the county, any provision of the
Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided, however, that if any portion of the
proceeds of such tax shall have been pledged to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes, or
other obligations or evidences of indebtedness, such portion of the proceeds of the tax as shall
have been so pledged shall not be used for any purpose except in payment of such bonds,
warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 126 126.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 126 RATIFIED 1957

Certain Obligations of Municipality Having Less than 6,000 Inhabitants Not Indebtedness Within
Meaning of Section 225.

Obligations hereafter incurred and securities hereafter issued for any of the following purposes
and under the following circumstances by a municipality having a population of less than six
thousand inhabitants shall not be deemed to constitute indebtedness of such municipality within
the meaning of section 225 of this Constitution: (a) for the purpose of acquiring, providing or
constructing sanitary or storm water sewers, or street or sidewalk improvements, the cost of
which, in whole or in part, is to be assessed against the property drained, served or benefited by
such sewers or abutting such improvements; or (b) for the purpose of acquiring, providing or
constructing school houses, provided that there shall be pledged for payment of the principal of
and interest on such obligations or securities a tax which the governing body of such
municipality shall have determined, upon the basis of its estimate of the revenues from said tax,
will be sufficient to pay said principal and interest at their respective maturities.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 127 127.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 127 RATIFIED 1957

Court Costs and Fees, Allowances, etc., of Officers of Walker County.

The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Walker county, and the method of disbursement thereof. Also, the
legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs,
charges, fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, and compensation to be charged or
received by the judge of probate, sheriff, circuit clerk, register of the circuit court, tax assessor,
and tax collector of Walker county, or any other county officer on a fee basis, and may place any
of such officers on a salary, and provide that the costs, charges, fees, commissions, percentages,
and allowances collected by such officers shall be paid into the county treasury from which their
salaries and office expenses shall be paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 128 128.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 128 RATIFIED 1957

Economic Development of Bullock County.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, Bullock county shall have full and continuing power and authority to do any
one or more of the following, provided that such action is first approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of the county who vote at an election held for such purpose.

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described
in subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association, or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 9 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the county or may be
limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a special county
privilege license tax or taxes of not exceeding one percent paralleling the state sales and use
taxes imposed by chapter 20 of Title 51, Code of Alabama (1940) as amended.

8 To construct a dam or system of dams, and to acquire a site or sites therefor, on any public
stream flowing within the county for the purpose of impounding waters to be used in irrigation
projects, or in generating hydroelectric power, or in providing recreational facilities, or for other
purposes, and to accept any funds by way of gift, grant, or loan from the federal government, or
any agency or instrumentality thereof, for the purpose of constructing such dam or system of
dams.

9 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

10 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by
such board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of Bullock
county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the office of the judge of
probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in function, and to delegate to such
public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all powers and authority
conferred in this amendment upon the county.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of Bullock county for the purpose of
determining the borrowing capacity of such county under section 224 of the Constitution.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the power by general,
special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of the
purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 129 129.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 129 RATIFIED 1957

Additional Property Taxes in School Districts of Tallapoosa County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, the governing
body of Tallapoosa county shall have the power to levy and collect in any school district in the
county a special district tax not to exceed three-fourths of one percent ( 3/4 %) on the value of
the taxable property within such district for school purposes; provided that the levying of such
tax and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors in
each such district and approved by a majority of those voting at such election. The election shall
be called, held, conducted and canvassed and may be contested as in the case of three-mill school
tax elections held pursuant to chapter 10, article 7, Title 52, Code of Alabama of 1940. All funds
arising from the special school tax levied in any district of the county shall be expended for the
exclusive benefit of that district as the law may direct. Provided, however, that such tax shall not
apply to any property which is subject to an additional municipal tax for school purposes, in the
same or a greater amount, levied pursuant to the authority of amendment LVI[56] to the
Constitution of Alabama, so long as such municipal tax
is levied and collected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 130 130.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 130 RATIFIED 1957

Special Tax by School Districts of Colbert County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the several school districts of Colbert county, Alabama shall have the
power to levy and collect a special district tax of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of
taxable property in such districts for school purposes; provided, that the levying of such tax and
the time during which it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to
a vote of the qualified electors in each such district and voted for by a majority of those voting at
such election; and further provided that such election shall be held in the same manner as now
provided for an election on the school district tax authorized in article XIX of the Constitution of
Alabama; and be it further provided that the funds arising from the special school tax levied in
any
district which votes the same independently of the county shall be expended for the exclusive
benefit of the district as the law may direct.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 131 131.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 131 RATIFIED 1957

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in Butler County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or like governing body of Butler county
shall levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized
by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not exceeding one percent on the value of the
property in the county as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds of
which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes, provided that such tax and the purpose
or purposes
thereof, and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to a
vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those voting at such
election. The special tax provided for herein may be reduced from time to time, in the manner
provided herein, for such periods of time as are necessary. If any proposal to levy a tax is
defeated in any election, subsequent elections thereon may be held at any time. The election
provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the
manner provided for an election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article
XIX, of the Constitution of Alabama, by article 7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940).
The tax shall be collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and laws as
the taxes of the state are collected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 132 132.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 132 RATIFIED 1957

Altering Boundaries, Reducing Area or Abolishing Macon County.

The legislature may, with or without the notice prescribed by section 106 of this Constitution, by
a majority vote of each house, enact general or local laws altering or re-arranging the existing
boundaries, or reducing the area of, or abolishing, Macon county, and transferring its territory, or
any part thereof, its jurisdiction and functions, to contiguous counties. Toward this end, there
shall be a committee composed of the senators and representatives who now represent the
counties of Bullock, Elmore, Lee, Macon, Montgomery, and Tallapoosa in the legislature, to
study and determine the feasibility of abolishing Macon county or reducing its area, and to
formulate the legislation deemed necessary for such purpose. The committee shall select a
chairman and a vice-chairman from among their number, shall meet on the call of the chairman,
and shall report its findings, conclusions, and recommendations to the legislative council on or
before the first Friday in October, 1958; and the legislative council shall submit such report and
any legislation proposed by the committee to the legislature at the 1959 regular session thereof.
The committee shall be discharged upon the filing of its report with the legislative council.
Committee members shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to their regular legislative per
diem and allowances for each day they serve, not to exceed fifty days altogether. The committee
may employ such engineering, technical, clerical, and Stenographic personnel as may be
necessary for the conduct of its work, and may fix their compensation. The compensation and
expenses of the committee and its employees, and the other necessary expenses incurred by the
committee, shall be paid from any money in the state treasury not otherwise appropriated, on
requisitions certified by the committee chairman; provided, that the aggregate amount to be
expended by the committee shall not exceed the sum of fifty thousand dollars.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 133 133.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 133 RATIFIED 1957

License, Excise, etc., Taxes on Wages or Salaries by Municipal Corporations in Walker County.

No municipal corporation in Walker county, Alabama shall have power or be authorized to levy,
impose, assess, or collect any license, excise, tax, or fee on the right to work for wages or on
salary in the service of an employer; and any such levy heretofore made shall be null and void.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 134 134.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 134 RATIFIED 1957

Costs and Charges of Courts and Compensation of Officers of DeKalb County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in DeKalb county and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, and
salary, including the method or basis of their compensation, to be charged or received by the
judge of probate, sheriff, tax assessor, tax collector, register, and circuit clerk of DeKalb county,
including the right to place any of such officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged or
collected by them to be paid into the treasury from which their salaries are paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 135 135.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 135 RATIFIED 1957

Fees, Allowances, etc., of Judge of Probate and Other Officers of Madison County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the fees,
commissions, percentages,costs, allowances, and compensation to be charged or received by the
judge of probate or any other officer of Madisoncounty, and may place such officer on a salary,
and provide that the fees, commissions, percentages, costs, and allowancescollected by such
officer shall be paid into the county treasury from which his salary shall be paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 136 136.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 136 RATIFIED 1957

Compensation, Allowances, etc., of Officers of Colbert County.

The legislature may hereafter, from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, regulate, and alter
the costs and charges of courts, and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, or salaries to
be charged or received by any officer of Colbert county, including the method and basis of fixing
and paying their compensation; provided, that no county officer's compensation shall be
increased or diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected or appointed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 137 137.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 137 RATIFIED 1957

Costs and Charges of Courts and Fees, Allowances, etc., of Officers of Cullman County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter, and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Cullman county, and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances,
and compensation of any officer of Cullman county, and may change the method or basis of
compensating any officer of Cullman county, including the power to place any such officer on a
salary and to provide for the fees, commissions, percentages, or allowances collectible by such
officer to be paid into the treasury from which his salary is paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 138 138.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 138 RATIFIED 1957

Fees, Allowances, etc., of Officers of Dallas County.

The legislature may hereafter from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter and regulate
the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, and compensation to be charged or received by
the judge of probate, tax assessor, tax collector, sheriff, coroner, register in chancery, circuit
clerk, clerk-register, and members of the court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or
like governing body of Dallas county. The legislature shall also have the power and authority to
place any of such officers on a salary and to provide that the fees, commissions, percentages, and
allowances collected by such officers shall be paid into the county treasury from which their
salaries shall be paid. The compensation of any such officer may be increased but not
diminished, during the term for which he was elected or appointed, the provisions of any article
or amendment of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding. Amendment XLVI [46]; is
hereby expressly
repealed. The basis of compensation of all employees of Dallas county and of the above named
officers heretofore fixedpursuant to authority of amendment XLVI [56] and in effect August 1,
1957, shall continue in force untilotherwise fixed, altered or regulated by the legislature of
Alabama by general or local laws.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 139 139.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1957 ***

AMENDMENT 139 RATIFIED 1957

Costs and Charges of Courts in Montgomery County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws, fix, alter and regulate the costs
and charges of courts in Montgomery county, and the method of disbursement thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 140 140.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1958 ***

AMENDMENT 140 RATIFIED 1958

Special, Private or Local Laws Relating to Lauderdale County and Municipalities Therein.

The legislature shall not pass a special, private, or local law changing the form of government of
Lauderdale county or of any city, town, village, district, or other such political subdivision of the
county, or abridge the term of any elected officer thereof, by the abolition of his office or
otherwise, unless the operation of such law shall be approved by a vote of the duly qualified
electors of such county, city, town, village, district, or other political subdivision of the county, at
an election held for such purpose, in the manner prescribed by such law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 141 141.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 141 RATIFIED 1960

Bond Issue for Mental Hospital at University of Alabama Medical Center.

The state is authorized to become indebted and to issue interest bearing bonds, in addition to
those heretofore authorized and sold, in an aggregate principal amount not exceeding $3,000,000.
The proceeds derived from the sale of said bonds shall be used solely for the purpose of paying
the expenses incurred in the sale and issuance thereof and for the construction and equipment of
a hospital building to constitute a part of the University of Alabama Medical Center, and to be
used for the care and treatment of mental patients and for training of medical students in the field
of mental illness. Said bonds shall be sold only at a duly advertised public sale or sales, upon
sealed bids or at auction, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net interest cost to the state
for the bonds offered for sale, and shall be sold at not less than their face value plus accrued
interest thereon. Said bonds shall be direct general obligations of the state and for the prompt and
faithful payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon the full faith and credit of the state
are hereby irrevocably pledged. In addition thereto, there is hereby specifically and irrevocably
pledged for payment of the principal of and interest on said bonds, pro rata and without priority
of one bond over another by reason of prior issuance or otherwise, so much as may be
necessary for said purpose of those portions of the state taxes on the sale of spirituous or vinous
liquors and of the state license taxes on those selling, storing or receiving for distribution malt or
brewed beverages that are required by law on the date of the adoption of this amendment to be
paid into the Alabama special mental health fund. The said special pledge shall create a charge
on the tax proceeds herein specially pledged prior to all other charges or expenses for mental
health
purposes or any other purposes whatsoever. The bonds issued under this amendment and the
income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation in the state of Alabama. The legislature shall
adopt appropriate enabling legislation to carry out the intent and purpose of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 142 142.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 142 RATIFIED 1960

Laws Placing Responsibility for County Roads in State Highway Department.

The legislature shall not hereafter by general, special or local law authorize the state highway
department or any other agency of the state of Alabama, other than a court of county
commissioners, board of revenue or like county governing body, to assume responsibility for the
construction, repair or maintenance of all county roads or bridges within a county unless the
assumption of such responsibility by the state highway department or other agency shall be
approved by a vote of the duly qualified electors of the county in which such roads lie at an
election held for such purpose, in the manner that may be prescribed by law. Provided, the state
highway department, or other state agency may engage in the construction, repair or
maintenance of a county road or bridge upon written agreement signed by the director and a
majority of the members of the county governing body; and provided further that the legislature
is not prohibited from authorizing the highway director or other state agency to designate certain
routes or roads within a county as a part of the state highway system.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 143 143.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 143 RATIFIED 1960

Special Property Tax in Barbour County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or like governing body of Barbour county
may levy each year hereafter, in lieu of the tax levy authorized by the first proviso of section 215,
article XI of the Constitution, a special county tax on the taxable property within the county at a
rate not to exceed twenty-five cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in
such county, to pay any debt or liability incurred for the erection of a new county courthouse, for
the construction, repair, and maintenance of other necessary public buildings, and for general
county purposes; provided, that the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose
thereof shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted
for by a majority of those voting at such election. The election shall be held and conducted in the
same manner as county school tax elections, except that no petition of electors shall be necessary
to initiate the same.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 144 144.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 144 RATIFIED 1960

Laws Changing Form of Government of Colbert County or Municipalities Therein or Changing
Term of Office, Compensation, Allowances, etc., of Officers Thereof.

The legislature shall not pass a special, private, or local law changing the form of government of
Colbert county or of any city, town, village, district, or other such political subdivision of the
county, or abridging the term of any officer thereof, by the abolition of his office or otherwise, or
increasing or decreasing or altering the salary or other compensation, fees, commissions,
percentages, or allowances of any officer thereof, by the imposition of new, different, and
additional duties, or by expense allowances, during the term for which he was elected or
appointed, or at any time, unless the operation of such law shall be approved by a vote of the duly
qualified electors of such county, city, town, village, district, or other political subdivision of the
county, at an election held for such purpose, in the manner prescribed by such law. Nor shall the
legislature authorize the governing body of Colbert county or of any political subdivision thereof
to increase or decrease or alter the salary or other compensation, fees, commissions, percentages,
or allowances of any officer thereof, by the imposition of new, different, and additional duties, or
by expense allowances, during his term, or at any time, unless the operation of the law providing
therefor shall be approved by a vote of the duly qualified electors of the county or city, town,
village, district, or other political subdivision of the county affected thereby, at an election held
for such purpose, in the manner prescribed by such law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 145 145.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 145 RATIFIED 1960

Special Tax in School Districts of Coosa County.

The several school districts of Coosa county shall have power to levy and collect a special district
school tax not exceeding fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in
such district, provided the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall
have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the district and voted for by a
majority of those voting at such election. The special district tax authorized by this amendment
shall be in
addition to all other school district taxes authorized by law. The election provided for herein shall
be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the manner provided by law for
elections on the special county school tax authorized in amendment III [3] to the Constitution.
The revenue derived from the tax shall be used exclusively for the support and furtherance of
education and for constructing and equipping school buildings and acquiring sites therefor.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 146 146.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 146 RATIFIED 1960

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in DeKalb County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or like governing body of DeKalb county
shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all other taxes now
or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of seven and one-half mills on
each dollar's worth of taxable property in the county as assessed for state taxation during the
preceding year, provided that the question of levying the tax, the purpose thereof, and the time
such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified
electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those voting at such election; and, provided
further, that the total of all taxes levied for educational or school purposes in any school district
of the county shall not exceed a total of fourteen and one-half mills on each dollar's worth of
taxable property located in the district. If any proposal to levy the tax is defeated in any election,
subsequent elections thereon may be held at any time. The election provided for herein shall be
called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the manner provided for an election
on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article XIX, of the Constitution of
Alabama, by article 7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940). The tax shall be
collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and laws as the taxes of the state
are collected. The proceeds of the tax authorized by this amendment shall be used exclusively for
educational purposes, provided that the revenue derived from four and one-half mills of the total
rate of taxation authorized herein shall be devoted only to purposes of capital outlay, and the
revenue derived from the remaining three mills shall be devoted to current operating expenses.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 147 147.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 147 RATIFIED 1960

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in Lee County and City of Opelika.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue or like governing body of Lee county shall
have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all other taxes, now or
hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not exceeding one-half of one
per cent on the value of the taxable property in the county situated outside the corporate limits of
Auburn and Opelika, as such property was assessed for state taxation during the preceding year,
the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes, but may be pledged to
the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of
indebtedness issued for public school purposes, which pledges shall take priority as provided in
such bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness; provided that such tax and the
purpose or purposes thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been
first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county residing outside the corporate
limits of Auburn and Opelika, and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election.
Elections on proposals to levy this tax on the property in the county situated outside the
corporate limits of Auburn and Opelika shall be called and held in the same manner as now
provided by law for an election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article
XIX, of the Constitution of Alabama. The tax on property situated outside the corporate limits of
Auburn and Opelika shall be collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and
laws as the taxes of the state are collected, and the revenues derived from such tax shall be used
solely for school construction and other educational purposes in the territory of the county
outside the corporate limits of Auburn and Opelika.

The city of Opelika shall likewise have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama,
of not exceeding one-half of one per cent on the value of the taxable property situated within the
corporate limits of the city, as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds
of which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes, but may be pledged to the payment
of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness issued for
public school purposes, which pledges shall take priority as provided in such bonds, warrants, or
other evidences of indebtedness; provided that such tax and the purpose or purposes thereof and
the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. Elections
on proposals to levy this tax on property situated within the corporate limits of Opelika shall be
ordered and held in the same manner as provided by the law applicable to municipal corporations
for elections to authorize the issuance of municipal bonds. The additional tax, authorized by this
amendment to be levied on property situated within the corporate limits of Opelika, shall be
collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and laws as other taxes levied on
property by the city of Opelika are collected, and the revenues derived from this tax shall be used
solely for school construction and other educational purposes within the limits of the city of
Opelika.

If any proposal to levy a tax hereunder is defeated in any election, subsequent elections thereon
may be held at any time.

Nothing contained in this amendment shall be construed to authorize the levy and collection of
an additional tax on property situated within the corporate limits of the city of Auburn.

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 148 148.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 148 RATIFIED 1960

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in City of Auburn.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, the
city of Auburn shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, at a rate of not
exceeding one-half of one per cent in any one year, on the value of the property in the city, as
assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds of which tax shall
be used exclusively for the support and furtherance of education but may be pledged to the
payment of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness
issued for educational purposes. Any such pledges shall take priority as provided in such bonds,
warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness. Before any such tax may be levied, the maximum
rate of such tax, the purpose or purposes thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be
continued, shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the city of Auburn
and voted for by a majority of such electors voting at such election. The maximum rate, the
purpose or purposes and the duration of such special tax provided for herein may be renewed,
extended, revoked, or amended from time to time by like vote of the qualified electors of the city
of Auburn; provided, however, that no revocation or amendment shall be effective as to any tax
pledged to the payment of any bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness. If any
proposal to levy a tax is defeated in any election, subsequent elections thereon may be held at any
time. Each election held under the provisions hereof shall be ordered, held, paid for, canvassed
and may be contested in the same manner as is or may be provided by the law applicable to
municipal corporations for elections to authorize the issuance of municipal bonds.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 149 149.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 149 RATIFIED 1960

Special Tax in School District No. 1 of Madison County.

In addition to all taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, a
special tax of five mills on each dollar's worth of taxable property situated in school district no.
1, of Madison county, is hereby authorized, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for
public school purposes within the said district.

If in the election on this amendment the amendment receives the favorable vote of a majority of
the qualified electors of the district who vote hereon, a special tax of five mills shall be collected
in the district, as other special school district taxes are collected, for the tax year ending
September 30, 1959, and for each succeeding tax year thereafter until the tax is repealed
as herein provided.  If in the election on this amendment a majority of the qualified electors of
the district who vote hereon vote against the amendment, the special tax hereby authorized may
be levied only if the question of levying the tax, and the purpose thereof, shall have been first
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the district and voted for by a majority of the
electors participating in the election. The election shall be called, held, conducted, and governed
by the applicable provisions of article 7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940), which
governs elections on special school district taxes; and the tax hereby authorized shall be levied
and collected in the district as other special school district taxes are levied and collected. If the
proposal to levy the tax is defeated in any such election, it may not again be submitted to a vote
for one year, but after the expiration of one year, and at intervals of at least one year thereafter,
such proposal may be resubmitted to the qualified electors of the district.

After the special tax authorized hereby has been levied, the court of county commissioners, board
of revenue or like governing body of Madison county, upon receipt of a petition signed by not
less than twenty per cent of the qualified electors who reside in the district, must call an election
at which the question of the repeal of the tax, upon payment of all obligations then outstanding, if
any, shall be submitted to the qualified electors of the district. Should a majority of the qualified
electors participating in this election vote for the repeal of the tax, it shall cease immediately
upon the payment in full of all outstanding pledges, if any, against it. Should a majority of the
electors participating in the election vote against repeal, the question of repeal may not again be
submitted to a vote for one year; but after the expiration of one year, and at intervals of at least
one year thereafter, upon receipt of a petition signed by not less than twenty per cent of the
qualified electors residing within the district, the county governing body may order the question
of repeal of the tax resubmitted to the qualified electors of the district. 

The elections provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and governed
otherwise in the manner provided by article 7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940), for
an election on the special district school taxes authorized by amendment III [3] to the
Constitution of Alabama. The collection of the tax shall also be governed by the
applicable provisions of article 7, chapter 10, Title 52, Code of Alabama (1940), and the
proceeds shall be used exclusively for public school purposes within the district.

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 150 150.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 150 RATIFIED

Pension or Retirement System in Mobile County and Municipalities Therein.

The legislature may hereafter, by general, local, or special laws, provide for the establishment of
a pension or retirement system or systems for the benefit of public officers of Mobile county and
the officers of incorporated municipalities within the county, any provision of the Constitution to
the contrary notwithstanding, and may provide for the retirement of such officers on pay or part
pay. But any such law shall not become operative until it is first approved by a majority of the
qualified
electors of the county, or of the municipality affected thereby, voting in a referendum election
held for that purpose.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 151 151.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 151 RATIFIED 1960

Bonds of Mobile County for Schoolhouses and Hospitals.

Mobile county is hereby authorized to issue its bonds not exceeding $3,000,000 in principal
amount for the purpose of acquiring, providing, and constructing capital improvements in the
county of which not exceeding $1,000,000 aggregate principal amount shall be issued to pay the
costs of acquiring, providing, and constructing public schoolhouses in the county and of which
not exceeding $2,000,000 aggregate principal amount shall be issued to pay the costs of
acquiring, providing, and constructing public hospital buildings in the county, provided, that the
aggregate principal amount of any series of bonds at any time issued hereunder, when added to
the aggregate principal amount of all bonds then outstanding that are payable from or secured by
the special annual ad valorem tax authorized in amendment XVIII [18] of the Constitution of
Alabama, shall not exceed six and one-half percentum (6« %) of the assessed valuation of the
taxable property situated in said county, as assessed for state taxation for the state tax year next
preceding the issuance of such bonds hereunder; provided, further, that any bonds may be issued
hereunder only after the question of the issuance of such bonds shall have been submitted to the
qualified electors of Mobile county at an election called for that purpose by the governing body
of said county, at which a majority of said qualified electors voting at said election shall have
voted in favor of the issuance of such bonds, any such election to be called, held, conducted, and
canvassed, and notice thereof to be given, in the manner provided by the then existing general
laws of Alabama with respect to elections on the issuance of bonds by counties; provided,
however, that if a majority of the qualified electors of Mobile county participating in the election
on the adoption of this constitutional amendment shall vote for adoption of this amendment, then
the approval of this constitutional amendment expressed by the said vote in favor of its adoption
shall of itself authorize the issuance of the bonds provided for herein and in that event no
additional election by the voters of Mobile county shall be required to authorize the issuance of
said bonds. In the event that the majority vote at any election held hereunder is not in favor of the
issuance of the bonds proposed at such election, the governing body of Mobile county may from
time to time call other elections hereunder on the issuance of such bonds but not more than one
such election shall be held during any period of twelve months.

The bonds issued hereunder shall be general obligations of Mobile county secured by a pledge of
its full faith and credit, and in addition thereto, the governing body of said county shall in the
proceedings providing for the issuance of such bonds specially pledge for payment of the
principal thereof and the interest thereon, at the respective maturities of such principal and
interest, so much as may be necessary for said purpose of the said special tax, each such pledge
to be on a parity with all valid pledges of said special tax at any time made, to such extent as
shall not impair the obligation of then existing valid pledges. The principal of each series of said
bonds shall mature in annual installments, the first of which installments shall mature not later
than three (3) years after the date of the bonds of said series and the last of which shall mature
not later than thirty (30) years after the date of the bonds of said series; provided, that the
maturities of each series of bonds issued hereunder shall be so arranged at the time of the
issuance of such series of bonds that (a) no annual installment of principal of the bonds of such
series maturing during any fiscal year of said county shall be more than four times as great as the
smallest installment of principal of any series of bonds maturing during any prior fiscal year, and
(b) the aggregate amount of principal and interest that will mature in any one fiscal year with
respect to that series of bonds, and all other bonds then outstanding that are payable out of or
secured by a pledge of the aforesaid special tax, shall not exceed the amount of the proceeds
collected from the said tax during the then next preceding tax year. Except as herein otherwise
provided, all bonds issued hereunder shall be issued in accordance with, and shall be subject to,
the provisions of the general laws of Alabama existing at the time of the issuance of such bonds
respecting the sale, execution, issuance, and redemption of bonds by counties.

For payment of the principal of and interest on any bonds that may be issued hereunder, and so
long as any of said principal and interest remains unpaid, the governing body of Mobile county is
hereby authorized to continue the levy of the said special annual ad valorem tax provided for in
said amendment XVIII [18] at such rate as may be sufficient to pay such principal and interest at
their respective maturities; provided, that the total rate of said special tax that may be levied and
collected for payment of said bonds and all other bonds payable out of or secured by a pledge of
said tax, shall not exceed one-half of one per centum («  of 1%) of the assessed valuation of
taxable property in the county.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or other action
by the legislature shall not be a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder or the levy of said
special tax for payment thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 152 018.0 9025.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 152 RATIFIED 1960

Amendment of Amendment No. 18.

Amendment XVIII [18];. Mobile county may at any time and from time to time issue its bonds
for construction and improvement, or either, of hard surfaced roads, hard surfaced bridges, and
surface water drainage facilities, or any thereof, in said county and, to provide for payment of the
principal of and interest on such bonds, may levy and collect a special annual ad valorem tax on
the taxable property in said county at a rate not exceeding one-half of one per centum ( « 
of 1%) of the assessed valuation of the taxable property in said county; provided, that the total
principal amount of each series of bonds at any time issued hereunder, when added to the
principal amount of all then outstanding bonds theretofore issued hereunder and of all then
outstanding bonds theretofore issued under any other constitutional amendment that are
payable from or secured by the said special tax, shall not exceed six and one-half per centum (6
«  %) of the assessed valuation of the taxable property situated in said county, as assessed for
state taxation for the then preceding state tax year; provided, further, that the rate of the said
special tax levied for payment of the bonds at any time issued hereunder and all other bonds at
any time issued pursuant to any other constitutional amendment and payable out of or secured by
said special tax shall not exceed said rate of one-half of one per centum ( «  of 1%) hereinabove
specified; and provided, further, that any bonds may be issued hereunder and said special tax for
payment thereof may be levied and collected only after a majority of the qualified electors of said
county voting at an election called for that purpose by the governing body of said county shall
have voted in favor of the issuance of such bonds and the levy of such tax therefor. Each such
election shall be called, held, conducted, and canvassed, and notice thereof shall be given, in the
manner provided by the general laws of Alabama respecting elections on the issuance of bonds
by counties, as such laws may exist at the time such election is called; provided, that prior to the
holding of any election hereunder, the governing body of Mobile county shall cause to be
prepared engineering maps and reports respecting the proposed work on roads, bridges and
drainage facilities, or any thereof, shall adopt a resolution containing a brief description,
including the name if any, of each proposed item of construction or improvement, a statement of
the length or location of each such item and of the estimated cost thereof, and a statement of the
total amount of the bonds proposed to be issued for all work of construction or improvement
described in said resolution, and shall cause said resolution to be published in a newspaper
published in the county one time not less than thirty days before such election. Any number of
items of construction or improvement may be described in one resolution; and the question of the
issuance of bonds and the levy and collection of said tax with respect to all of the work described
in each resolution shall be submitted to the voters in one single proposition at any election held
hereunder. Any number of such resolutions may be adopted on the same day, and any number of
propositions may be submitted to the voters on the same day. Each engineering report prepared in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be accompanied by a certificate of the engineer
preparing such report that the material proposed to be used for any road or bridge work described
in such report meets the then existing specifications of the Alabama highway department
applicable to the same type of construction or improvement.

The limitation of six and one-half per centum (6 «  %) of the assessed value of taxable property
in the county, hereinabove provided for, is applicable only to the amount of bonds that may be
outstanding immediately following the delivery of each series of bonds issued hereunder and
shall not restrict the total amount of bonds that may be from time to time issued hereunder.

The bonds issued hereunder shall be general obligations of Mobile county secured by a pledge of
its full faith and credit, and in addition thereto, the governing body of said county shall in the
proceedings providing for the issuance of such bonds specially pledge for payment of the
principal thereof and the interest thereon, so much of the said special tax as may be necessary to
pay said principal and interest at their respective maturities. Each such pledge of the special tax
made for the benefit of the bonds issued hereunder shall be on a parity with all valid pledges of
said special tax theretofore or thereafter made for the benefit of bonds issued hereunder or under
any other constitutional amendment, to such extent as shall not impair the obligations of any then
existing valid pledges. The principal of each series of said bonds shall mature in annual
installments, the first of which installments shall mature not later than three (3) years after the
date of the bonds of said series and the last of which shall mature not later than thirty (30) years
after the date of the bonds of said series; provided, that the maturities of each series of bonds
issued hereunder shall be so arranged at the time of the issuance of such series of bonds that (a)
no annual installment of principal of the bonds of such series maturing during any fiscal year of
said county shall be
more than four times as great as the smallest installment of principal of any series of bonds
maturing during any prior fiscal year, and (b) the aggregate amount of principal and interest that
will mature in any one fiscal year with respect to that series of bonds, and all other bonds then
outstanding that are payable out of or secured by a pledge of the aforesaid special tax, shall not
exceed the amount of the proceeds collected from the said tax during the then next preceding tax
year. Except as herein otherwise provided, all bonds issued hereunder shall be issued in
accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of the general laws of Alabama
respecting the sale, execution, issuance, and redemption of bonds by counties, as such laws may
exist at the time of the delivery of such bonds.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and the enactment of local legislation
shall not be a prerequisite to the taking of any action hereunder by the said county and its
governing body; and no local legislation at any time adopted with respect to this amendment
shall be effective, and all such local legislation is hereby repealed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 153 153.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 153 RATIFIED 1960

Special Tax for School Purposes in Winston County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of Winston
county shall have power to levy and collect a special county tax not exceeding fifty cents on each
one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in such county in addition to taxes now authorized
or that may hereafter be authorized for public school purposes, and in addition to that now
authorized under section 260 of article XIV and amendment III [3] of the Constitution; provided,
that the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county, and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election. The election provided for herein shall be called, held, conducted, paid
for, and governed otherwise in the manner provided for an election on the special county school
tax authorized in amendment III [3] to the Constitution of Alabama. 

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 154 154.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 154 RATIFIED 1960

Nonresidents Making Mortgage Loans Through Licensed Mortgage Loan Brokers.

Section 1. Any corporation which is not organized under the laws of this state and has no place of
business in this state may take and hold mortgages on real property located within this state,
deposit the proceeds thereof in a bank account, or bank accounts, in this state, collect the debts
secured thereby and may appoint a custodian or collection agent, who must be duly licensed
under the laws of this state, to engage in the business of mortgage loan broker, to hold for such
non-resident such securities, collect such debts, manage any property acquired by foreclosure
thereof, sell and dispose of any property acquired by foreclosure thereof and enforce the
provisions of such mortgages and no such foreign corporation shall be deemed to be doing
business in this state solely by reason of doing any or all of the acts designated herein; provided,
however, that any custodian or agent appointed under the provisions of this amendment by any
such foreign corporation shall pay all applicable municipal license taxes and shall pay an
occupational license tax as mortgage loan broker to the state of Alabama of one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first year that such broker represents each such foreign corporation and five
dollars ($5.00) annually for representing each such foreign corporation thereafter. Any foreign
corporation which engages in any of the acts prescribed in this section may sue or be sued in this
state in relation to any such mortgages held by it, or real property, securities or debts acquired by
it and service of process may be perfected upon such foreign corporation by service upon any
resident licensed mortgage loan broker appointed as custodian or agent by such corporation in
this state.

Section 2. No foreign corporation, which does no other acts in this state than those provided in
section 1 hereof, shall be required to pay any franchise tax, qualification fee, permit fee, nor shall
it be required in any other way to qualify to do business in this state.

Section 3. This amendment shall be self-executing, but the legislature may, by general act, make
provision for enforcement thereof and provide penalties for the violation thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 155 155.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 155 RATIFIED 1960

Economic Development of Municipality of Uniontown.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, the municipality of Uniontown in Perry county shall have full and continuing
power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do any one or more of the
following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend this credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bond, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipality of
Uniontown, or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in the municipality of Uniontown in Perry
county, or upon all property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such
municipality shall describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited
by any proposed use or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body, and subject to such limitations as the governing body of the
municipality of Uniontown in Perry county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to
that effect in the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective
successors in function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or
governing body all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon the municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of the municipality of Uniontown in Perry
county for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the county under section 225 of
the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in section 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

10 The municipality of Uniontown in Perry county shall not make any engagement or
commitment or undertake any project under the provisions hereof unless and until the
proposition has been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the municipality. The
governing body of the municipality may provide for holding such election, but in no case shall an
election
be held until notice of the election and of the proposition to be voted on has been published for at
least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 156 156.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1960 ***

AMENDMENT 156 RATIFIED 1960

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in School District No. 2 of Randolph County.

The city of Roanoke shall have the power to levy and collect in school district no. 2 of Randolph
county a special property tax, in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the
Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not more than one-half of one percent on the value of the
property situated in the district as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year; provided
that all such additional property taxes shall be levied and collected solely for educational
purposes and may be pledged to the payment of the principal and interest on bonds, warrants, or
other evidences of indebtedness issued for educational purposes, and provided, further, that the
rate of such tax and the purpose or purposes thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be
continued shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of such district and
voted
for by a majority of those voting at the election. Each election held under the provisions of this
amendment shall be ordered, held, conducted, paid for, and governed otherwise in the same
manner as provided by the law applicable to municipal corporations for elections to authorize the
issuance of municipal bonds. Elections to authorize the levy of such additional tax
or taxes may be held as often as ordered by the governing body of the city of Roanoke, but when
a proposition is submitted to the electors to levy such additional tax, and such proposition is
defeated, then no subsequent election shall be held hereunder in the district for a period of one
year thereafter.

The revenue derived from the additional tax authorized by this amendment shall be used solely
for the construction of schools and other educational purposes in school district no. 2 of
Randolph county.

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 157 157.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 157 RATIFIED 1961

Bonds for Construction and Improvement Purposes at University of Alabama Research Institute.

The state of Alabama is authorized to become indebted for building, construction and
improvement purposes at the University of Alabama Research Institute at Huntsville, and in
evidence of the indebtedness so incurred to sell and issue, in addition to all other bonds of the
state, interest-bearing general obligation bonds of the state not exceeding three million
dollars in principal amount. The bonds shall be general obligations of the state of Alabama and
the full faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the prompt and
faithful payment of the principal of the bonds and the interest thereon. The proceeds from the
sale of such bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used exclusively for the acquisition of
lands, and to provide funds to be used for construction and equipment of a research institute;
provided that the expenses incurred in connection with the sale and issuance of the bonds may
also be paid from such proceeds.

The board of trustees of the University of Alabama is hereby vested with full authority, except as
limited herein, to provide the terms of the bonds and to provide for the sale and issuance thereof.
The bonds may be sold, executed and delivered at any time and from time to time, may be in
such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities, may bear
such date or dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as principal or interest or both with
rights
of conversion into another form, may be payable in such installments and at such place or places,
may bear interest at such rate or rates payable and evidenced in such manner, and may contain
provisions for redemption at the option of the state to be exercised by said board at such date or
dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such redemption price or prices, all as shall be
provided by the said board in the resolution or resolutions whereunder the bonds are issued. The
principal of each series of bonds shall mature in annual installments in such amounts as shall be
specified in the resolution or resolutions of the said board under which they are issued, the first
of which installments shall mature not later than one year after the date of the bonds of such
series and the last of which installments shall mature not later than twenty years after the
date of the bonds of the same series. When each series of bonds is issued, the maturities of the
bonds of that series shall, to such extent as may be practicable, be so arranged that during each
then succeeding fiscal year of the state the aggregate installments of principal and interest that
will mature on all bonds that will be outstanding hereunder, immediately following the issuance
of the bonds of that series, will be substantially equal; provided that the determination by the said
board that the requirements of this sentence have been complied with shall be conclusive of such
compliance and the purchasers of the bonds with respect to which such determination is made
and all subsequent holders thereof shall be fully protected thereby. None of the bonds shall be
sold for less than face value plus accrued interest thereon to the date of delivery, and all of the
bonds shall be sold only at public sale or sales, either on sealed bids or at public auction, after
such advertisement as may be prescribed by the said board, to the bidder whose bid reflects the
lowest net interest cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the bonds sold;
provided, that if no bid deemed acceptable by the said board is received all bids may be rejected.

The bonds shall be signed in the name of the state by the governor and countersigned by the
president pro tempore of the board of trustees of the University of Alabama and the great seal of
the state of Alabama or a facsimile thereof shall be impressed, printed or otherwise reproduced
thereon and shall be attested by the signature of the secretary of state; provided that facsimile
signatures of any one or any two (but not all) of said officers may be reproduced on such bonds
in lieu of their manually signing the same. Coupons attached to the bonds and representing
installments of interest thereon shall be signed with the facsimile signature of the state treasurer,
which facsimile signature is hereby adopted as due and sufficient authentication of said coupons.

All bonds issued under the provisions of this amendment, together with the interest income
thereon, shall forever be exempt from taxation in this state.

The proceeds from the sale of bonds hereby authorized, after the payment of all expenses of the
sale thereof shall be set apart in a special trust fund in the state treasury to be designated the
University of Alabama Research Institute bond fund; and such proceeds shall be used solely for
the purposes, hereinabove enumerated, for which the bonds are authorized to be
issued; provided that the plans and specifications for any building constructed with moneys from
said special fund shall be approved by the Alabama building commission or any agency
designated by the legislature as its successor.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing and no further authorization from the
legislature shall be a prerequisite to the validity of any bonds issued hereunder.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 158 158.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 158 RATIFIED 1961

Bond Issue to Assist in Construction and Equipment of Hospitals, etc.

(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution of the state of Alabama, or any
amendment thereto heretofore adopted, the governor shall from time to time issue negotiable
interest bearing bonds for the purposes and in the manner and subject to the limitation stated in
this amendment. The bonds shall be general obligations of the state of Alabama and the full
faith and credit and taxing power of the state are hereby pledged to the punctual payment of the
bonds and the interest thereon. The aggregate principal amount of all bonds issued hereunder
shall not exceed two million ($2,000,000) and they shall mature within ten years from the date of
issuance. It is further provided that not more than one million dollars ($1,000,000) shall be issued
during the biennium ending September 30, 1963, and that the additional one million
dollars ($1,000,000) shall be issued in the ensuing biennium.

The proceeds from the sale of such bonds are hereby appropriated and shall be used solely for the
construction and equipping of hospitals, health centers, and related facilities pursuant to Act No.
211, General Acts of Alabama 1945, page 330, and approved July 7, 1945; and Act 287, General
Acts of Alabama 1945, page 474, approved July 7, 1945; and Act No. 46, General and Local
Acts 1949, page 68, approved June 2, 1949; as said acts are now or may hereafter be amended;
and such facilities established and operated by the corporate authorities of a city or town, or a
county governing body under the provision of Code of Alabama, Title 22, section 189, as same is
now or may hereafter be amended; or any act supplemental thereto or amendatory thereof. The
funds provided hereby shall be used for construction and equipping facilities under contracts
which have been or are let on or after July 1, 1961; shall be used to match federal funds available
for hospital, health center, and related medical facilities provided under Public Law 725, 79th
Congress and Public Law 482, 83rd Congress, as said public laws are now or may hereafter be
amended; and that the local governments in the area where each hospital, health center, or related
medical facility is to be constructed or equipped shall contribute at least as much money for the
construction and equipping as does the state; and provided further that the state shall not
contribute more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for any facility included within
the scope of this amendment.

In determining where a hospital, health center, or related medical facility to be constructed with
funds appropriated herein shall be located, consideration shall be given to the communities on
the basis of relative need. Counties receiving prior allotments hereunder shall not be precluded
from receiving an additional allotment for other facilities at the discretion of the state board of
health. A sum not to exceed sixty thousand dollars ($60,000) may be used by the state board of
health from the proceeds of the sale of said bonds for administering the provision of this
amendment.

(b) All bonds hereunder and the interest thereon shall be payable from any funds in the state
treasury not otherwise appropriated. The bonds may be executed and delivered from time to time
in such forms, denominations, series and numbers, may be of such tenor and maturities, may bear
such date or dates, may be in registered or bearer form either as to principal and interest or both
with rights of conversion into another form, may contain provisions for redemption at the
option of the state at such date or dates prior to their maturity and upon payment of such
redemption price or prices, and may contain such other terms and conditions not inconsistent
with the provisions hereof, all as may be provided in the order of the governor providing for the
issuance thereof which shall be made at the time of each sale of any of said bonds. The
principal of each series of said bonds shall mature in annual installments in such amounts as shall
be specified in the order under which they are issued, the first of which installments shall mature
not later than one year after the date of the bonds of such series and the last of which installments
shall mature not later than ten years after the date of the bonds of the same series. When each
series of said bonds is issued, the maturities of the bonds of that series shall, to the extent as may
be practicable, be so arranged that during any then succeeding fiscal year of the state the
aggregate installments of principal and interest that will mature of all of the said bonds that will
be outstanding hereunder, immediately following the issuance of the bonds of that series, will be
substantially equal; provided, that the determination in the order under which the bonds of such
series are issued that the requirements of this sentence have been complied with shall be
conclusive of such compliance and the purchasers of the bonds with respect to which such
determination is made and all subsequent holders thereof shall be fully protected thereby. None
of said bonds shall be sold for less than face value plus accrued interest to the date of delivery,
and all of said bonds shall be sold at public sale or sales, either sealed bids or at public auction,
after advertisement. in a financial journal published in New York at least one time not less than
ten days prior to the date fixed for the sale, to the bidder whose bid reflects the lowest net interest
cost to the state computed to the respective maturities of the bonds sold; provided, that if no bid
deemed acceptable by the governor is received all bids may be rejected.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 159 159.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 159 RATIFIED 1961

Continuity of Legislature in Event of Enemy Attack.

The legislature may provide for the continuity of the legislature of the state of Alabama and the
representation therein of each of the political subdivisions of the state in the event of an attack by
an enemy of the United States, by providing for the selection of emergency interim legislators
who shall be designated for temporary succession to the powers and duties but not the office of a
legislator in case of such emergency. Such emergency interim legislator may serve only when the
legislator in whose stead he is authorized to serve has died or is unable temporarily for physical,
mental or legal reasons to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of his office, and until
such time as the elected legislator is able to resume the duties of his office, or in case of a
vacancy in such office a successor has been elected in accordance with section 46 of this
Constitution.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 160 160.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 160 RATIFIED 1961

Issuance of Revenue Securities by Institutions of Learning.

Revenue bonds and other securities at any time issued by or on behalf of any state university,
college or institution of learning for the purpose of acquiring, constructing and equipping any
new building or facility or for the purpose of enlarging, extending or improving any existing
building or facility shall not be deemed to constitute debt of the state within the meaning of
section 213, as amended, of the Constitution, if by their terms such bonds or other securities are
not made a charge on the general credit or tax revenues of the state but are made payable solely
out of revenues derived from the operation of any existing building or buildings or facility or
facilities as well as from the new building or facility to be acquired or constructed with the
proceeds thereof or from the enlargements, extensions or improvements to any existing building
or facility to be
acquired or constructed with the proceeds thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 161 266.0 014.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 161 RATIFIED 1961

Board of Trustees of Auburn University.

Section 1. Auburn University, formerly called the Alabama Polytechnic Institute, shall be under
the management and control of a board of trustees. The board of trustees shall consist of two
members from the congressional district in which the institution is located, one from each of the
other congressional districts in the state as the same were constituted on the first day of January,
1961, the state superintendent of education, and the governor, who shall be ex officio president
of the board. The trustees shall be appointed by the governor, by and with the advice and consent
of the senate, and shall hold office for a term of twelve years, and until their successors shall be
appointed and qualified. The board shall be divided into three classes, as nearly equal as may be,
so that one-third may be chosen quadrennially. Vacancies occurring in the office of trustees from
death or resignation shall be filled by the governor, and such appointee shall hold office until the
next meeting of the legislature. The members of the board of trustees as now constituted shall
hold office until their respective terms expire under existing law, and until their successors shall
be appointed as herein required. No trustee shall receive any pay or emolument other than his
actual expenses incurred in the discharge of his duties as such. No employee of Auburn
University shall be eligible to serve on its board of trustees.

Section 2. Section 266 of article 14 of the Constitution of Alabama 1901 is hereby repealed.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 162 162.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 162 RATIFIED 1961

Additional Tax for School Purposes in Baldwin County

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of
Baldwin county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county tax of
fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public school
purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided in the
third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

Section 2. If this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of the county
who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted, the
additional tax provided for in section 1 may be levied and collected thereafter without any other
election having been held thereon. But if this amendment is approved and a majority of
the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon vote against its approval, the tax may not be
levied unless the rate of the tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof shall have been
again submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of
those voting at the election. Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one
year, and shall be called, held, and conducted in the same way, according to the general laws, as
other elections on the question of levying special county school taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 163 163.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 163 RATIFIED 1961

License Taxes for School Purposes in Bullock County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue or other like governing body of Bullock
county may, to raise revenue for support of the public schools within the county, fix and collect
license taxes for any business, trade, occupation or profession engaged in or carried on within the
county, provided the rate of such licenses, the time they are to be continued and the purpose
thereof shall have been first submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the county and
voted for by a majority of those voting at such election. Such elections shall be held in the same
manner as county school tax elections, except that no petition of electors shall be necessary to
initiate the same. Provided that such governing body of Bullock county shall not levy a privilege
or license tax on any business or occupation on which a privilege or license tax is levied by
sections 176-180, and 182-186 of Title 51 of the Code of Alabama 1940, as amended and in
effect at the date of adoption of this amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 164 164.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 164 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in Tuscaloosa County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue or like governing body of
Tuscaloosa county shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to
all other taxes, now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not
exceeding one-half of one per cent on the value of the taxable property in the county situated
outside the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city board of education of
Tuscaloosa, as such property was assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the
proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes; provided that such tax and
the purpose or purposes thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have
been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county residing outside the territory
subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city board of education of Tuscaloosa, and voted for
by a majority of those voting at the election. Elections on proposals to levy this tax on the
property in the county situated outside the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the
city board of education of Tuscaloosa shall be called and held in the same manner as now
provided by law for an election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article
XIX, of the Constitution of Alabama. The tax on property situated outside the territory subject to
the jurisdiction and control of the city board of education of Tuscaloosa shall be collected in the
same manner and under the same requirements and laws as the taxes of the state are collected,
and the revenues derived from such tax shall be used solely for school construction and other
educational purposes in the territory of the county outside the territory subject to the jurisdiction
and control of the city board of education of Tuscaloosa.

Section 2. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue or like governing body of
Tuscaloosa county shall likewise have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama,
of not exceeding one-half of one per cent on the value of the taxable property situated
within the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city board of education of
Tuscaloosa, as assessed for state taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds of which shall
be used exclusively for educational purposes; provided that such tax and the purpose or purposes
thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been first submitted to a
vote of the qualified electors of the territory and voted for by a majority of those voting at the
election. Except as herein otherwise provided, elections on proposals to levy this tax on property
situated within the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city board of education
of Tuscaloosa shall be ordered and held in the same manner as provided by the law applicable to
elections on school district taxes. The additional tax, authorized by this amendment to be
levied on property situated within the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city
board of education of Tuscaloosa, shall be collected in the same manner and under the same
requirements and laws as other taxes levied on property in the city of Tuscaloosa are collected,
and the revenues derived from this tax shall be used solely for school construction and other
educational purposes within the territory subject to the jurisdiction and control of the city board
of education of Tuscaloosa.

Section 3. If any proposal to levy a tax hereunder is defeated in any election, subsequent elections
thereon may be held at intervals of not less than one year.

Section 4. The special school tax herein authorized shall be effective for a period of thirty years.

Section 5. This amendment shall be self-executing, and no enabling legislation shall be
necessary.

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 165 165.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 165 RATIFIED 1961

Use of Special School Tax Funds, Refunding of Bonds, etc., in Calhoun County.

Any funds derived from the voted special school taxes levied in certain cities and school districts
in Calhoun county under the provisions of that certain amendment to the Constitution proposed
by Act No. 587 enacted at the 1947 regular session of the legislature of Alabama [Amendment
No. 68] that are not needed to pay debt service on bonds issued under said amendment, or to
comply with any other covenants contained in proceedings authorizing the issuance of such
bonds, may, to such extent as the governing body of the political subdivision or agency entitled
thereto may determine are excess of the amount then needed for the specific public school
purpose for which said taxes were voted, be used for public school purposes generally. Any
bonds which are now outstanding or which may hereafter be issued under the provisions of
said amendment or this amendment may at any time and from time to time be refunded, whether
before, at or after the maturity of the bonds refunded, by the issuance of new bonds, payable from
the same sources as those refunded, in a principal amount sufficient to pay said bonds so
refunded and any premium necessary to redeem, pay, purchase or otherwise retire said bonds;
and bonds may be issued for the combined purpose of so refunding any such bonds and obtaining
funds for acquiring, constructing and improving public school buildings, including sites therefor.
Notwithstanding the fact that they may be payable solely from a specified source, all bonds
hereafter issued under the provisions of said amendment or this amendment shall be negotiable
instruments within the meaning of the negotiable instruments law of Alabama if they otherwise
possess all the characteristics of negotiable instruments under the laws of Alabama and shall be
legal investments for trust funds. Bonds authorized to be issued hereunder shall be issued in the
same manner and by the same respective political subdivisions as those authorized to be issued
under said amendment proposed by said Act No. 587 [Amendment No. 68] and may be so issued
without the necessity of any further election. No bonds issued hereunder shall be chargeable
against the constitutional debt limit of the political subdivision by which they are issued.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 166 166.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 166 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Acquiring, etc., Vocational Trade School and for Rural and Industrial
Development in Chilton County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or like governing body of
Chilton county shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all
other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of two mills on
each one dollar's worth of taxable property in the county, the proceeds of which shall be used for
the acquiring, constructing, enlarging, repairing, improving, equipping, furnishing, operating, or
maintaining of a vocational trade school in the county and for the rural and industrial
development of the county, provided that the tax has been approved by a majority of the qualified
electors of the county voting thereon. The county governing body may also pledge the proceeds
of the tax to the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of
indebtedness issued for such purposes.

Section 2. In event this amendment is approved the court of county commissioners, board of
revenue, or like governing body of Chilton county shall have the authority to call an election at
any time. In the call for said election, there shall be submitted to the qualified electors of Chilton
county a statement of the rate of the tax, the time that it shall continue, and whether or not it shall
be levied; and such tax shall be levied if a majority of the qualified electors voting at the said
election should vote in favor thereof. If in said election the majority of the qualified electors of
the county who vote thereon vote against its approval, the tax may not be levied unless the rate of
the tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall be again submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election.
Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one year and shall be held and
conducted in the same manner as county school tax elections, except that no petition of electors
shall be necessary to initiate the same.

Section 3. The power to levy granted by this amendment will not be exhausted by one election
but shall remain a continuing grant unless and until it is repealed by subsequent constitutional
action.

Section 4. This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 167 167.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 167 RATIFIED 1961

Additional Tax for School Purposes in Choctaw County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of
Choctaw county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county tax
of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public
school purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided
in the third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

Section 2. If this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of the county
who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted, the
additional tax provided for in section 1 may be levied and collected thereafter without any other
election having been held thereon. But if this amendment is approved and a majority of
the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon vote against its approval, the tax may not be
levied unless the rate of the tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof shall have been
again submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of
those voting at the election. Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one
year, and shall be called, held, and conducted in the same way, according to the general laws, as
other elections on the question of levying special county school taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 168 168.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 168 RATIFIED 1961

Additional Tax for School Purposes in Clarke County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of
Clarke county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county tax of
fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public school
purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided in the
third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

Section 2. If this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of Clarke county
who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted, the
additional tax provided for in section 1 may be levied and collected thereafter for a period of 20
years without any other election having been held thereon. But if this amendment is
approved and a majority of the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon vote against its
approval, the tax shall not be levied unless the rate of the tax, the time it is to continue, and the
purpose thereof shall have been again submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county
and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. Subsequent elections may be held at
intervals of not less than one year, and shall be called, held, and conducted in the same way,
according to the general laws, as other elections on the question of levying special county school
taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 169 169.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 169 RATIFIED 1961

Special School Tax in Clay County.

Section 1. If authorized at an election held for such purpose, the governing body of Clay county
may levy and collect a special county tax at a rate not exceeding one-half of one percent on the
value of the taxable property within the county as assessed for state taxation, the proceeds of
which shall be used exclusively for public school purposes.

Section 2. An election shall be ordered by the county governing body to determine whether or not
a special tax shall be levied for public school purposes as authorized herein upon the request of
the county board of education, and the election shall be held and conducted in accordance with
general laws providing for school tax elections pursuant to constitutional amendment III[ 3].

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 170 170.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 170 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in City of Tuscumbia.

The city of Tuscumbia shall have power to levy and collect a special property tax in addition to
all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of five mills
on each dollar of taxable property situated therein, for educational purposes; provided that before
such tax may be levied and collected the question of levying the tax, the purpose thereof, and the
time such tax is proposed to be continued shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. The
election shall be ordered, held, and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and
conducting district school tax elections.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 171 171.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 171 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in City of Sheffield.

The city of Sheffield shall have power to levy and collect a special property tax in addition to all
other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of five mills on
each dollar of taxable property situated therein, for educational purposes; provided that before
such tax may be levied and collected the question of levying the tax, the purpose thereof, and the
time such tax is proposed to be continued shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. The
election shall be ordered, held, and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and
conducting district school tax elections.


*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 172 172.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 172 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in City of Muscle Shoals.

The city of Muscle Shoals shall have power to levy and collect a special property tax in addition
to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of five
mills on each dollar of taxable property situated therein, for educational purposes; provided that
before such tax may be levied and collected the question of levying the tax, the purpose thereof,
and the time such tax is proposed to be continued shall have been first submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. The
election shall be ordered, held, and conducted as provided by law for calling, holding and
conducting district school tax elections.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 173 173.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 173 RATIFIED 1961

Additional Tax for School Purposes in Franklin County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of Franklin
county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county tax of fifty
cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public school
purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided in the
third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax herein
authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 174 174.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 174 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Acquiring, etc., Vocational Trade School and for Rural and Industrial
Development in Jackson County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or like governing body of
Jackson county shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all
other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of two mills on
each one dollar's worth of taxable property in the county, the proceeds of which shall be used for
the acquiring, constructing, enlarging, repairing, improving, equipping, furnishing, operating, or
maintaining of a vocational trade school in the county and for the rural and industrial
development of the county, provided that the tax has been approved by a majority of the qualified
electors of the county voting thereon. The county governing body may also pledge the proceeds
of the tax to the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other evidences of
indebtedness issued for such purposes.

Section 2. In event this amendment is approved the court of county commissioners, board of
revenue, or like governing body of Jackson county shall have the authority to call an election at
any time. In the call for said election, there shall be submitted to the qualified electors of Jackson
county a statement of the rate of the tax, the time that it shall continue, and whether or not it shall
be levied; and such tax shall be levied if a majority of the qualified electors voting at the said
election should vote in favor thereof. If in said election the majority of the qualified electors of
the county who vote thereon vote against its approval, the tax may not be levied unless the rate of
the tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof shall be again submitted to a vote of the
qualified electors of the county and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election.
Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one year and shall be held and
conducted in the same manner as county school tax elections, except that no petition of electors
shall be necessary to initiate the same. 

Section 3. The power to levy granted by this amendment will not be exhausted by one election
but shall remain a continuing grant unless and until it is repealed by subsequent constitutional
action.

Section 4. This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 175 175.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 175 RATIFIED 1961

Special District Tax for Furtherance of Education in Jefferson County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may hereafter be authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the several school districts of Jefferson county shall, subject to an election
in each such school district as hereinafter provided, have power to levy and collect a special
district tax of not exceeding fifty (50) cents on each one hundred dollars ($100) of taxable
property in such district for the furtherance of education therein. A school district within the
meaning of this section shall include (a) that part of Jefferson county outside of the
municipalities of Birmingham, Bessemer, Fairfield, Tarrant City and Mountain Brook as one
district, (b) the city of Birmingham as one district, (c) the city of Bessemer as one district, (d) the
city of Fairfield as one district, (e) the city of Tarrant City as one district, and (f) the city of
Mountain Brook as one district. No tax shall be levied hereunder unless the rate of such tax, the
time such tax is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first submitted to the vote of
the qualified electors in each such district and voted for by a majority of those voting at such
election. Any election on any such district tax shall be called and held, the results declared, and
the tax levied and collected in the same manner as now or hereafter provided by law in the case
of school
district taxes authorized by amendment III [3] to the Constitution of Alabama, except that no
county-wide tax shall be required as a condition precedent for a district tax under this
amendment. The holding of one election shall not preclude a later election in the same district
but no election in a district shall be held within two years from the date of the last election held
in such district under the authority of this amendment. The proceeds of any special district tax
authorized by this
amendment shall be expended for the support of education in the district in which levied.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 176 176.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 176 RATIFIED 1961

Additional Tax for School Purposes in Lamar County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of
Lamar county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county tax of
fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public school
purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided in the
third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

Section 2. If this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of Lamar county
who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted, the
additional tax provided for in section 1 may be levied and collected thereafter for a period of 20
years without any other election having been held thereon. But if this amendment is approved
and a majority of the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon vote against its approval,
the tax shall not be levied unless the rate of the tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose
thereof shall have been again submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted
for by a majority of those voting at the election. Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of
not less than one year, and shall be called, held, and conducted in the same way, according to the
general laws, as other elections on the question of levying special county school taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 177 177.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 177 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in Lauderdale County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue or like governing body of Lauderdale
county shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all other
taxes, now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, of not exceeding
one-half of one per cent on the value of the taxable property in the county situated outside the
corporate limits of Florence, as such property was assessed for state taxation during the
preceding year, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for educational purposes, but
may be pledged to the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds, warrants, or other
evidences of indebtedness issued for public school purposes, which pledges shall take priority as
provided in such bonds, warrants, or other evidences of indebtedness; provided that such tax and
the
purpose or purposes thereof and the time such tax is proposed to be continued, shall have been
first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county residing outside the corporate
limits of Florence, and voted for by a majority of those voting at the election. Elections on
proposals to levy this tax on the property in the county situated outside the corporate
limits of Florence shall be called and held in the same manner as now provided by law for an
election on the school district tax authorized in amendment III [3], article XIX, of the
Constitution of Alabama. The tax on property situated outside the corporate limits of Florence
shall be collected in the same manner and under the same requirements and laws as the taxes of
the state are collected, and the revenues derived from such tax shall be used for school
construction and other educational purposes solely in the territory of the county outside the
corporate limits of Florence.

If any proposal to levy a tax hereunder is defeated in any election, subsequent elections may be
held at intervals of not less than two years.

This amendment shall be self-executing.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 178 178.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 178 RATIFIED 1961

Special School Tax for City of Florence.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners or other like governing body of Lauderdale county
may levy and collect a special tax at a rate not exceeding one-half of one percent on the value of
the taxable property within the city of Florence, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively
for public school purposes, but shall not be used for or pledged to the payment of bonds or
warrants, by the board of education of the city of Florence or its successor in function, provided
the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue and the purpose thereof shall have been first
submitted to the vote of the qualified electors of the city and voted for by a majority of those
voting at such election.

Section 2. Elections may be called, held and conducted pursuant to this amendment in
accordance with general laws providing for and regulating elections on district school taxes
authorized by the third amendment to this Constitution, but subsequent elections thereon may be
held at intervals of not less than two years.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 179 179.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 179 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for School Capital Outlay Purposes in Mobile County.

The county commission; or other governing body by whatever named called or styled; of Mobile
county is authorized and shall have the power to levy and collect a special property tax, in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of the state of
Alabama, of one-half of one percent ( «  of 1%) on the value of the taxable property in the
county, as such property was assessed for taxation during the preceding year. The proceeds of
such tax shall be used exclusively for public school capital outlay purposes but may be pledged
to secure the payment of principal and interest on warrants or other evidence of indebtedness
issued and sold for public school capital outlay purposes by the board of school commissioners
of Mobile county or other public body charged with the duties, powers and authority of
conducting and operating public schools in Mobile county; which pledge shall take priority as
provided in such warrants or other evidence of indebtedness and is in consonance with the
provisions of existing law, at the time of the issuance and sale of the said warrants, touching the
issue and sale of warrants by school bodies, for capital outlay purposes; provided that
before such tax shall be levied, there shall be submitted to the qualified electors of Mobile county
a statement of the rate of the tax, the time that it shall continue, and whether or not it shall be
levied; and such tax shall be levied if a majority of the qualified electors voting at the said
election should vote in favor thereof; and provided further, that if a majority of the qualified
electors of Mobile county participating in the election on the adoption of this Constitutional
amendment shall vote for the adoption of this amendment, then the approval of this amendment,
expressed by said vote in said county in favor of its adoption, shall of itself authorize the levy
and collection of the said special property tax for a period of thirty years commencing with the
levy for the tax year of said county for which taxes will become due and payable to said county
on October 1, 1962. Subsequent elections held hereunder shall be called, held and governed in all
respects by the law that at the time of the said elections, is in effect for elections to determine
whether or not a special county-wide school tax shall be levied and collected under the
provisions of amendment III [3] (article XIX) of the Constitution of Alabama. The proceeds of
the said tax shall be used solely for public school capital outlay purposes.

The power to levy, granted by this amendment, will not be exhausted by one election but shall
remain a continuing grant unless and until it be repealed by subsequent Constitutional action.

Should, at any election by the qualified electors of Mobile county held hereunder, as hereinbefore
provided for, the proposal to tax be defeated; the proposal to tax may be renewed and another
election had at any time, upon complying with the requisites of law for the calling of such
elections; provided, however, that no such subsequent election may be had within one year after
the election in which the proposal was defeated.

This amendment shall be self-executing and shall require no enabling legislation.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 180 180.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 180 RATIFIED 1961

Special Property Tax for Educational Purposes in School District No. 1, Randolph County.

The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of Randolph
county may levy and collect a special property tax, in addition to all taxes now or hereafter
authorized by the Constitution and laws of Alabama, at a rate not exceeding one-half of one
percent on the value of the taxable property in school district number one, as assessed for state
taxation during the preceding year, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for
educational
purposes; provided, that the rate of such tax and the purpose or purposes thereof, and the time
such tax is to be continued, which shall not exceed thirty years, shall have been first submitted to
a vote of the qualified electors of district one and voted for by a majority of those voting at the
election. If any proposal to levy a tax is defeated in any election, subsequent elections
thereon may be held at any time. The elections shall be called, held, conducted, paid for, and
governed otherwise in the manner provided for elections on school district taxes as authorized in
amendment III [3], article XIX, of the Constitution, and by article 7, of chapter 10, Title 52, Code
of Alabama 1940, as heretofore or hereafter amended.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 181 181.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 181 RATIFIED 1961

Special School Tax in Talladega County.

In addition to all taxes of every kind now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and laws of
Alabama, the court of county commissioners, the board of revenue or other like governing body
of Talladega county may levy and collect a special school tax not to exceed three-tenths of one
percent of the value of the taxable property within the county, or the value of the taxable property
within any school district in the county, the proceeds of which shall be used exclusively for
public
school purposes, provided the rate of such tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof
shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county; and if voted for
by a majority of the qualified electors of the county, such tax shall be levied on all taxable
property within the county, and if not voted for by a majority of the qualified electors of the
county but voted for by a majority of the qualified electors of one or more school districts within
the county
then such tax shall be levied on all taxable property within each school district in which a
majority of the qualified electors of such district vote for such tax, and the proceeds of such tax
shall be used exclusively for public school purposes within the school districts of the county
which vote for the tax. The question of the levy of such tax may be presented to the qualified
electors of the county as a whole or to the qualified electors of any school district within the
county and if rejected by the qualified electors of the county or by the qualified electors of any
school district, may be re-submitted to the qualified electors of the county or of such school
district after the expiration of one year from the last election. The court of county commissioners
or other like governing body of Talladega county shall call all elections herein provided for upon
being
presented with a resolution of the Talladega county board of education requesting that an election
be called.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 182 182.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 182 RATIFIED 1961

Additional School Tax in Washington County.

Section 1. The court of county commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of
Washington county shall have power to levy and provide for collection of an additional county
tax of fifty cents on each one hundred dollars worth of taxable property in the county, for public
school purposes, in the same manner and subject to the same election requirements as provided
in the third amendment to this Constitution with respect to other county school taxes. The tax
herein authorized shall be in addition to all other county taxes authorized in this Constitution as
amended, and the proceeds thereof shall be spent for public school purposes only.

Section 2. If this amendment is approved and a majority of the qualified electors of the county
who vote thereon vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment when it is submitted, the
additional tax provided for in section 1 may be levied and collected thereafter without any other
election having been held thereon. But if this amendment is approved and a majority of
the qualified electors of the county who vote thereon vote against its approval, the tax may not be
levied unless the rate of the tax, the time it is to continue, and the purpose thereof shall have been
again submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the county and voted for by majority of
those voting at the election. Subsequent elections may be held at intervals of not less than one
year, and shall be called, held, and conducted in the same way, according to the general laws, as
other
elections on the question of levying special county school taxes.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 183 183.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 183 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of Autauga County and Municipalities Therein.

Autauga county and the incorporated municipalities therein, jointly or severally, after an election
held in accordance herewith shall have full and continuing power and authority to:

1 Purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 Lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 Promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 Become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 Lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 Become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be payable
from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the county or
municipality or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 Levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a special
tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in the county or in any municipality in Autauga
county or upon all property in any district to be specially improved and benefited by any
proposed
use or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 Pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 Create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of Autauga county
may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the office of the judge of
probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in function, and to delegate to such
public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all powers and authority
conferred in this amendment upon the county or any municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of Autauga county or any municipality therein
for the purpose of determining their borrowing capacity under sections 224 and 225 of the
Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature may enact laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

Neither the county nor any municipality therein shall make any engagement or commitment or
undertake any project under the provisions hereof unless and until the proposition has been
approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the locality affected thereby. The governing
body of the county or any municipality may provide for holding such elections, but in no
case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of the proposition to be voted on has
been published for at least three successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 184 184.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 184 RATIFIED 1961

Legislation as to DeKalb County.

The legislature shall not pass a special, private, or local law changing the form of government of
DeKalb county, or abridging the term of any officer thereof, by the abolition of his office or
otherwise, or increasing or decreasing or altering the salary or other compensation, fees,
commissions, percentages, or allowances of any officer thereof, by the imposition of new,
different, and additional duties, or by expense allowances, during the term for which he was
elected or appointed, or at any time, unless the operation of such law shall be approved by a vote
of the duly qualified electors of such county at an election held for such purpose, in the manner
prescribed by such law. Nor shall the legislature authorize the governing body of DeKalb county
to increase or decrease or alter the salary or other compensation, fees, commissions, percentages,
or allowances of any officer thereof, by the imposition of new, different, and additional duties, or
by expense allowances, during his term, or at any time, unless the operation of the law providing
therefor shall be approved by a vote of the duly qualified electors of the county, at an election
held for such purpose, in the manner prescribed by such law.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 185 185.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 185 RATIFIED 1961

Compensation of Certain Officers of Elmore County.

The legislature may from time to time, by general or local laws applicable to or operative in
Elmore county, fix, regulate, and alter the fees, commissions, allowances, and salaries, including
the method and basis of their compensation, to be charged or received by the judge of probate,
sheriff, tax assessor, tax collector, and clerk and register of the circuit court of Elmore
county; and may place any or all of such officers on a salary and provide for the fees,
commissions, allowances, and percentages collectible by such officers to be paid into the treasury
from which their salaries are paid. Provided, that no law changing the method or basis for
compensating such officers shall become effective unless it is approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of the county who vote thereon at a referendum election held for such purpose.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 186 186.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 186 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of Franklin County and Municipalities Therein.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, Franklin county, or any municipality in Franklin county, shall have full and
continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do any one or
more of the following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend this credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of Franklin county, or
the municipality therein, as the case may be, or may be limited as to the source of their payment. 

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in Franklin county, or upon all property in the
municipality, as the case may be, or upon all property in any district the boundaries of which the
governing body of the county or the municipality, as the case may be, shall describe and which it
shall determine to be specially improved and benefited by any proposed use or expenditure of the
proceeds of such tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body, and subject to such limitations as the governing body of the county or
the governing body of the municipality, as the case may be, may impose, by approving and filing
a certificate to that effect in the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their
respective successors in function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its
board or governing body all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon Franklin
county or any municipality therein.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further, and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of Franklin county or any municipality therein
for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the county or any such municipality, as
the case may be, under sections 224 and 225 of the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized
shall be in addition to those provided for or permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution
and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.
 
10 Neither Franklin county, nor any municipality in Franklin county, shall make any engagement
or commitment or undertake any project under the provisions hereof unless and until the
proposition has been approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the county or of the
municipality therein, as the case may be. The governing body of the county, or of the
municipality, as the case may be, may provide for holding such election, but in no case shall an
election be held until notice of the election and of the proposition to be voted on has been
published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 187 187.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 187 RATIFIED 1961

Bond Issue for Construction and Equipment of Courthouse and Jail in Geneva County.

Geneva county is hereby authorized to incur indebtedness to the extent of not exceeding
$600,000 in principal amount, and to issue its bonds in evidence of the indebtedness so incurred,
for the purpose of constructing and equipping a new courthouse and jail in said county and, in
order to provide for the payment for the principal of and interest on said bonds and any
redemption premium necessary for the redemption thereof and the expense of maintaining the
courthouse and
jail so constructed, to levy and collect a special ad valorem tax on all taxable property in said
county at a rate not exceeding 2 «  mills on each dollar of the assessed valuation of said property
as assessed for state taxation; provided, that the said special tax shall cease to be levied when the
principal of and interest on the bonds issued under the authority contained in this amendment
shall have been paid. Said bonds may be issued and said tax may be levied only after the question
of the
issuance of said bonds and the levy of said tax shall have been submitted to the qualified electors
of said county at an election called for that purpose by the governing body of said county and a
majority of said qualified electors voting at said election shall have voted in favor of the issuance
of said bonds and the levy of said tax, which election shall be called, held, conducted, canvassed
and may be contested, and notice thereof shall be given, in the manner provided by the then
existing laws of Alabama with respect to elections on the issuance of bonds by counties;
provided further, that if a majority of the qualified electors of said county participating in the
election on the adoption of this amendment shall vote for the adoption thereof then the approval
of this amendment expressed by the vote in said county in favor of its adoption shall of itself
authorize the issuance of the bonds and the levy of the tax herein authorized, and in that event no
additional election by the electors of said county shall be required to authorize the issuance of
said bonds or the levy of said tax. At any election held under this amendment the question of the
issuance of said bonds and the levy of said tax shall be submitted as a single proposition. In the
event the majority vote in said county on the adoption of this amendment is against the adoption
hereof,
or in the event the majority vote at any election held in said county pursuant to the provisions of
this amendment after its adoption is not in favor of the issuance of the bonds and the levy of the
tax proposed at such election, the governing body of said county may from time to time call other
elections hereunder on the issuance of said bonds and the levy of said tax, but not more than one
such election shall be held during any period of twelve consecutive months. The power to
become
indebted, to issue bonds in evidence of such indebtedness, and to levy the tax as herein
authorized shall be in addition to all other powers which the said county may have under the
Constitution and laws of Alabama, and shall not be chargeable against the amount of
indebtedness which may be incurred or the rate of taxes which may be levied under the
Constitution and laws in effect prior to the adoption of this amendment.

All bonds issued under this amendment shall be general obligations of the county secured by an
irrevocable pledge of its full faith and credit and of the said special tax to the extent necessary to
pay the principal of and interest on said bonds. The governing body of said county may further, if
it deems such action desirable, pledge for payment of the principal of and  nterest on said bonds
any other tax which said county may be authorized to levy under any provision of the
Constitution. All bonds issued hereunder shall be issued in accordance with, and shall be subject
to, the provisions of the general laws of Alabama existing at the time of the sale of said bonds
respecting the maturities, sale, execution and redemption of bonds by counties. Any special tax
which may be levied hereunder shall be levied and collected in accordance with the general laws
of Alabama at the time in force respecting the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes by
counties.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 188 188.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 188 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of Greene County.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of Alabama to the contrary notwithstanding, Greene
county shall have full and continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance
herewith, to do any one or more of the following:

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses in the county.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association or corporation whatever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidence of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding
$250,000, in order to secure funds for the purchase, construction, lease or acquisition of any of
the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be used in furtherance of any of the other
powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such obligations or evidence of indebtedness
may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by subdivision 8 of this amendment) be
issued upon the full faith and credit of Greene county, or may be limited as to the source
of their payment.

7 To apply the proceeds from taxes levied and collected under the provisions of section 215 of
the Constitution and amendments thereto to the purchase, construction, lease, or acquisition of
any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or for the furtherance of any of the other
powers or authorities granted in this amendment, provided the proceeds from such taxes have not
been pledged for debts or liabilities now existing.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidence of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from taxes levied and collected under authority of section 215
of the Constitution and amendments thereto which have not been pledged for debts and liabilities
now existing, and to obligate itself irrevocably to continue to use the proceeds from such tax
until such obligations or evidences of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any
rental or sales proceeds of property leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body, and subject to such limitations as the governing body of Greene county
may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the office of the judge of
probate of the county or secretary of state, or their respective successors in function, and to
delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all powers and
authority
conferred in this amendment upon the county.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidence of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that proceeds from taxes authorized
under section 215 of the Constitution and amendments thereto have been pledged to the payment
thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder thereof need inquire further; and the levy and
collection of such tax shall continue until the principal of and interest on such obligation or
evidence of indebtedness shall have been paid in full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other
obligations or evidence of indebtedness issued hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness
of Greene county for the purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of the county
under sections 224 and 225 of the Constitution.

This amendment shall be self executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

10 Greene county shall not make any engagement or commitment or undertake any project under
the provisions hereof unless and until the proposition has been approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of the county. The governing body of the county may provide for holding such
election, but in no case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of the substance
of the proposition to be voted on has been published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 189 189.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 189 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of Municipalities in Lamar County.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, any municipality in Lamar county, or any one or more of them, shall have full
and continuing power and authority, after an election held in accordance herewith, to do any one
or more of the following: 

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein. 

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the municipality or
may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a
special tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in any municipality in Lamar county or upon all
property in any district the boundaries of which the governing body of such municipality shall
describe and which it shall determine to be specially improved and benefited by any proposed use
or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of any
municipality in Lamar county may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in
the office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in
function, and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body
all powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon any such municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further, and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of any municipality in Lamar county for the
purpose of determining the borrowing capacity of such municipality under sections 224 and 225
of the Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the right and power by
general, special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of
the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

10 Any municipality in Lamar county may make engagements or commitments or undertake
projects authorized under the provisions of this Constitution and amendments thereto provided
any such engagement, commitment, or undertaking is first approved by a majority of the
qualified electors of such municipality voting in a referendum election held for such purpose.
The governing body of any municipality may provide for holding such elections, but in no case
shall an election be held until notice of the election and of the proposition to be voted on has
been published for at least three successive weeks.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 190 190.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 190 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of Lawrence County and Municipalities Therein.

Any provision of the Constitution or laws of the state of Alabama to the contrary
notwithstanding, Lawrence county and any municipality located therein shall have full and
continuing power and authority to do any one or more of the following provided that such action
is first approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the county or the municipality who vote
at an election held for such purpose.

1 To purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 To lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange or give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 To promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 To become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 To lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 To become indebted and to issue and sell interest-bearing bonds, warrants (which may be
payable from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the county or
municipality or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 To levy and collect, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a special county
or municipal privilege license tax or taxes of not exceeding one percent paralleling the state sales
and use taxes imposed by chapter 20 of Title 51, Code of Alabama 1940 as amended.

8 To pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds
of property leased or sold by it.

9 To create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of Lawrence
county or any municipality may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the
office of the judge of probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in function,
and to delegate to such public authority or corporation and its board or governing body and all
powers and authority conferred in this amendment upon the county and municipalities.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of Lawrence county for the purpose of
determining the borrowing capacity of such county under section 224 of the Constitution.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature shall have the power by general,
special or local act to adopt laws supplemental to this amendment or in furtherance of the
purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 191 191.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 191 RATIFIED 1961

Promotion of Industrial, Commercial and Agricultural Development in Madison County and City
of Huntsville.

For the promotion of local industrial, commercial or agricultural development, Madison county
and the city of Huntsville shall each have full and continuing power (a) to purchase, construct,
lease and otherwise acquire industrial, commercial and agricultural projects, including real and
personal property, plants, buildings, factories, works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any
kind whatsoever, (b) to lease, sell, exchange or otherwise convey all or any part of any such
project to any person, firm or corporation, and (c) after an approving election as hereinafter
provided, to sell and issue for such purposes interest-bearing general obligation bonds. Neither
the county nor the city shall issue any bonds under the authority of this amendment unless the
question of the issuance of such bonds has first been submitted to the qualified electors of the
county or the city, as the case may be, and approved at such election by a majority of the
qualified electors voting thereat. Each such election shall be called, held and conducted, and may
be contested, in the manner provided by law for county or municipal bond elections, as the case
may be. Bonds issued under the authority of this amendment shall not be considered
indebtedness of the county or the city, as the case may be, within the meaning of sections 224
and 225 of the Constitution of Alabama, but neither the county nor the city shall at any time issue
any bonds under the authority of this amendment if as a result thereof it will have outstanding an
aggregate principal amount of bonds issued hereunder in excess of twenty per cent of the
assessed value of the property in the county or the city, as the case may be. Neither shall the
county or the city issue
any bonds under the authority of this amendment unless prior thereto or contemporaneously
therewith the county or the city, as the case may be, has entered into a lease or other similar
agreement, with respect to the project being financed by such bonds, providing for the payment
to the county or the city, as the case may be, of net rentals sufficient to pay the principal of
and the interest on such bonds at the respective maturities of such principal and interest, and any
bonds issued hereunder shall be secured by a pledge of such rentals and may be secured by a
foreclosable mortgage on such project and by a pledge of any other taxes and revenues which the
county or the city, as the case may be, is authorized by law to pledge to the payment of its bonded
indebtedness. All bonds issued under the authority of this amendment shall be sold at public sale
in the manner required by law for the sale of county or municipal bonds, as the case may be, and
shall mature and be payable in annual or semiannual installments in such amounts and at such
times as to result in the aggregate amount of principal and interest maturing thereon in each year
following the year of their issuance being substantially equal, but shall not be subject to any other
provisions of law relating to maturities of county or municipal bonds. In the event that any such
action is necessary to prevent or cure a default in payment of the principal of or the interest on
any bonds issued under the authority of this amendment, the county or the city, as the case may
be, is authorized to levy and collect ad valorem taxes, without limitation as to rate or amount, on
the assessed value of all taxable property in the county or the city, as the case may be, but only so
long as and only to such extent as necessary to prevent or cure any such default.

In carrying out the purposes of this amendment, neither Madison county nor the city of
Huntsville shall be subject to the provisions of section 93 of the Constitution of Alabama, and
the taxes which the county and the city are hereinabove authorized to levy and collect are in
addition to all other taxes which the county and the city are authorized to levy and collect. This
amendment shall be self-executing, but, notwithstanding any contrary provisions of section 104
of the Constitution of Alabama, the legislature shall have the power, by general, special or local
act, to enact laws supplemental hereto or in furtherance of the purposes hereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 192 192.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 192 RATIFIED 1961

Pensions of Former Officers of Mobile County and Municipalities Therein.

Any provision of the Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who served as an
officer of Mobile county or any municipality therein before the establishment of a pension or
retirement system for the benefit of the elected or appointed officers of such county or
municipalities shall be eligible to receive a pension or retirement benefit in all respects equal to
officers serving when such pension or retirement system was established. The governing body of
the county and of each municipality therein is hereby authorized to expend any funds not
otherwise appropriated that may be required to pay the benefits payable to such former officers.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 193 193.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 193 RATIFIED 1961

Bond Issue for Capital Improvements in Mobile County.

Mobile county is hereby authorized to issue its bonds not exceeding $1,737,000 in aggregate
principal amount for the purpose of acquiring, providing, constructing and equipping capital
improvements in said county, including the acquisition of sites therefor, of which bonds
$500,000 in principal amount shall be issued to pay costs of acquiring, providing, constructing
and equipping public school buildings in said county, and $500,000 in principal amount shall be
issued to pay all or a part of the costs of acquiring, providing, constructing and equipping a
building or buildings for use for educational purposes on the college level in said county,
$606,000 in principal amount shall be issued to pay a portion of the costs of acquiring, providing,
constructing and equipping one or more public hospital buildings in said county whether such
buildings shall be owned by said county or by any public corporation therein, and $131,000 in
principal
amount shall be issued to pay all or part of the costs of acquiring, providing, constructing and
equipping one or more buildings in the county for the Alabama State College; provided, that the
aggregate principal amount of any series of bonds at any time issued hereunder, when added to
the aggregate principal amount of all bonds then outstanding that are payable from or secured by
the special annual ad valorem tax authorized in Amendment XVIII [18] of the Constitution
of Alabama, as amended, shall not exceed six and one-half per centum (6 «  %) of the assessed
valuation of the taxable property situated in said county, as assessed for state taxation for the
state tax year next preceding the issuance of such bonds hereunder; provided, further, that no
bonds may be issued under the authority of this constitutional amendment until after the question
of the issuance of such bonds shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of Mobile
county at an election called for that purpose by the governing body of said county and a majority
of said qualified electors voting at said election shall have voted in favor of the issuance of such
bonds, any such election to be called, held, conducted, and canvassed, and notice thereof to be
given, in the manner provided by the then existing general laws of Alabama pertaining to
elections on the issuance of bonds by counties; provided, however, that if a majority of the
qualified electors of Mobile county participating in the election on the adoption of this
constitutional amendment shall vote for adoption of this amendment, then the approval of this
amendment expressed by the said vote in favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the
issuance of the bonds provided for herein and in that event no additional election by the electors
of Mobile county, shall be required to authorize the issuance of said bonds. If the majority of the
qualified electors of Mobile county participating in the election on the adoption of this
amendment should not vote in favor of the adoption of this amendment, or if the majority of the
qualified electors of Mobile county voting at any election held under the provisions of this
amendment should not vote in favor of the issuance of the bonds proposed at such election, the
governing body of Mobile county may from time to time call other elections hereunder on the
issuance of such bonds, but not more than one such election shall be held during any period of
twelve months.

The bonds issued hereunder shall be general obligations of Mobile county for the payment of the
principal of and interest on which the full faith and credit of said county shall be irrevocably
pledged, and in addition thereto there shall be irrevocably pledged for payment of said principal
and interest, at the respective maturities thereof, so much as may be necessary for said
purpose of the said special tax, each such pledge to be on a parity with all valid pledges of said
special tax at any time made, to such extent as shall not impair the obligation of then existing
valid pledges. The principal of each series of bonds issued under the provisions of this
amendment shall mature in annual installments, the first of which installments shall mature not
later than three (3) years after the date of the bonds of said series and the last of which shall
mature not later than thirty (30) years after the date of the bonds of said series; provided, that the
maturities of each series of bonds issued hereunder shall be so arranged at the time of the
issuance of such series of bonds that (a) no annual installment of principal of the bonds of such
series maturing during any fiscal year of said county shall be more than four times as great as the
smallest installment of
principal of the same series maturing during any prior fiscal year, and (b) the aggregate amount
of principal and interest that will mature in any one fiscal year with respect to that series of
bonds, and all other bonds then outstanding that are payable out of or secured by a pledge of the
aforesaid special tax, shall not exceed the amount of the proceeds collected from the
said tax during the then next preceding tax year. Except as herein otherwise provided, all bonds
issued hereunder shall be issued in accordance with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of the
general laws of Alabama existing at the time of the issuance of such bonds respecting the sale,
execution, issuance, and redemption of bonds by counties. The indebtedness evidenced by the
bonds issued hereunder or under any other amendment to the constitution which are payable out
of or secured by a pledge of said special tax shall be in addition to and shall not be charged
against the limitation on the indebtedness of said county provided for in Section 224 of the
constitution.

For payment of the principal of and interest on all bonds that may be issued hereunder, and so
long as any of said principal and interest remains unpaid, the governing body of Mobile county is
hereby authorized to continue the levy of the said special annual ad valorem tax provided for in
said Amendment XVIII [18] at such rate as may be sufficient to pay such principal and interest at
their respective maturities; provided, that the total rate of said special tax that may be
levied and collected for payment of said bonds and all other bonds payable out of or secured by a
pledge of said tax shallnot exceed one-half of one per centum ( «  of 1%) of the assessed
valuation of taxable property in said county.

The provisions of this amendment shall be self-executing, and authorization from or other action
by the legislature shall notbe a prerequisite to the issuance of bonds hereunder or the levy of said
special tax for payment thereof.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 194 194.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 194 RATIFIED 1961

Budget of Mobile County Public Hospital Board.

A The following terms, wherever used in this amendment, shall be given the respective meanings
hereinafter set forth. "The board" means Mobile county public hospital board, a public
corporation existing under Act No. 46 adopted at the 1949 regular session of the legislature of
Alabama, as amended. "The 1955 board" means Mobile county hospital board created
and provided for in Act No. 105 adopted at the 1955 regular session of the said legislature, as
amended. "Public hospital facilities" means public hospitals of all types, public clinics, public
health centers, related public health facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments,
nurses' homes, and nurses' training facilities, and other facilities operated in connection with
public hospitals. "Public hospital purposes" means the acquisition, by purchase, lease, donation
or otherwise, and the construction, equipment, operation and maintenance of public hospital
facilities, including the treatment and care of indigent patients; "Participating municipality"
means each municipality in Mobile county having a population in excess of one thousand,
according to the last federal census or any subsequent federal or other official census. "Local
subdivision" means Mobile county and each participating municipality.

B The board is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a budget for each of its fiscal years
setting forth (a) the estimated amount of all expenditures that the board anticipates making
during such fiscal year for payment of administering, operating and maintaining any public
hospital facilities owned or managed by the board, including expenses for treatment and care of
indigent patients, payment of rentals with respect to any such public hospital facilities, payment
of costs of the acquisition and equipment of public hospital facilities, and payment of
installments of principal and interest, or either, maturing during that fiscal year on obligations
incurred or securities issued by the board for any of the aforesaid purposes; and (b) the estimated
amount of all moneys that the board anticipates receiving during the same fiscal year and that the
board has the right lawfully to apply for payment of the estimated expenditures set forth in the
same budget, including revenue of the board from the operation of any public hospital facilities
owned or operated by it, and any donations, taxes, appropriations, contributions by
the United States and any income or receipts from any other source that the board has the right
lawfully to use for payment of the said expenditures. Whenever the board shall determine that the
estimated amount of the said expenditures during any fiscal year will exceed the estimated
amount of the said receipts during any fiscal year, as shown by the budget for that fiscal year,
then the board shall have the power to allocate the said deficit among Mobile county and each
participating municipality, the amount allocated to each local subdivision being a sum
constituting the same proportion of the total of the said deficit that the population of that local
subdivision bears to a figure equal to the population of the entire of Mobile county plus the
population of each participating municipality, all such population figures to be based on the last
federal
census or any subsequent federal or other official census, and shall have the power to assess, levy
and collect from Mobile county and each participating municipality a sum equal to the portion of
the deficit allocated by the board to each local subdivision, which sum shall be payable to the
board by each local subdivision in twelve (12) equal monthly installments on the first day of each
month in the fiscal year with respect to which the said budget was made; provided, however, that
if a special annual ad valorem county tax for public hospital purposes shall be voted in Mobile
county, then the power of the board to allocate any deficit among the local subdivisions and to
assess, levy, and collect the amounts so allocated shall terminate after payment of the monthly
installment falling due on the January 1 next succeeding the October 1 on which any
such ad valorem tax so voted shall first be payable. The assessments and levies that the board is
herein authorized to make, shall constitute binding obligations and debts of the local subdivisions
collectible by suit or action brought by the board in any court of competent jurisdiction; but such
obligations on the part of the aforesaid local subdivisions shall not be deemed to constitute debts
of any local subdivision within the meaning of either section 224 or section 225 of the
Constitution. The legislature shall have the continuing power by local or special legislation
adopted at any time and from time to time, and without compliance with the provisions of section
106 of the Constitution, to specify the character and the maximum capacity or size of the public
hospital facilities with respect to which items of expenditure may be included in any budget
prepared by the board hereunder. Any such legislation adopted prior to the effective date of this
amendment is hereby validated. The requirements of this amendment, and of any such legislation
at any time adopted, as to the character and capacity or size of the public hospital facilities with
respect to which items of expenditures may be included in any budget prepared by the board
hereunder shall cease to be effective upon the termination, under the provisions hereof, of the
power of the board to make allocation of the aforesaid deficit among the local subdivisions.

C The 1955 board is hereby authorized to transfer to the board, and the board is hereby
authorized to assume, all assets, contracts, properties, obligations and liabilities of the 1955
board. The corporate existence of the 1955 board and all of its acts in acquiring property, making
contracts and incurring obligations and liabilities are hereby validated; and the transfer by
the 1955 board to the board of all of the said assets, contracts, properties, obligations and
liabilities and the assumption of all thereof by the board, to such extent as the said transfer and
assumption shall have taken place on the date when this amendment becomes a part of the
Constitution, are hereby validated. Following the completion of such transfer and assumption, the
governing body of Mobile county is authorized to adopt a resolution declaring the 1955 board to
be dissolved, whereupon it shall be dissolved.

D Bonds and other securities issued by the board shall not be deemed to constitute debts of
Mobile county within the meaning of section 224 of the Constitution or debts of any participating
municipality within the meaning of section 225 of the Constitution, and shall not be deemed to
constitute bonds of Mobile county or of any political subdivision thereof within the meaning of
section 222 of the Constitution, regardless of whether any such bonds or other securities may be
made payable from, or secured by a pledge of, the assessments herein provided for, the proceeds
of any contract between the board and any local subdivision, all or part of the proceeds from any
tax of any kind that may be allocated or appropriated to the board, revenues from operation of
public hospital facilities owned or operated by the board, or any other revenues of the
board. All pledges of any revenues of the board that may be made by it for the benefit of any
securities issued by it shall take precedence in the order in which made and shall create a charge
on the revenues so pledged prior to the expenses of operating and maintaining any public hospital
facilities.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 195 195.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 195 RATIFIED 1961

Special Tax for Public Hospital Purposes in Mobile County.

A The following terms, wherever used in this amendment, shall be given the respective meanings
hereinafter set forth. "The special tax" means the special county tax herein provided for. "The
board" means Mobile county public hospital board, a public corporation existing under Act No.
46 adopted at the 1949 regular session of the legislature of Alabama, as amended. "Public
hospital facilities" means public hospitals of all types, public clinics, public health centers,
related public health facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, nurses' homes, and
nurses' training facilities and other facilities operated in connection with public hospitals. "Public
hospital purposes" means the acquisition by purchase, lease, donation or otherwise, and the
construction, equipment, operation and maintenance of public hospital facilities, including the
treatment and care of indigent patients.

B If authorized by the vote of the majority of the qualified electors of Mobile county who
participate in any election called for the purpose, the governing body of Mobile county must,
subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this amendment, levy and collect, in addition
to all other taxes authorized by law, a special annual ad valorem county tax at a rate
not exceeding three mills on each dollar of taxable property in Mobile county, the proceeds from
which shall be used solely for public hospital purposes.

C If a majority of the qualified electors of Mobile county participating in the election on the
adoption of this amendment shall vote for adoption of this amendment, then the approval of this
amendment expressed by the said vote in favor of its adoption shall of itself authorize the special
tax and in that event no additional election by the voters of Mobile county shall be required
to authorize the levy of the special tax. If the majority vote at any election held hereunder is not
in favor of the levy of the tax, or if at any such election the special tax shall be voted at a rate of
less than three mills on each dollar of taxable property in Mobile county, then the governing body
of Mobile county may from time to time thereafter call other elections hereunder on
the levy of the special tax or on the increase of the rate thereof, up to but not exceeding three
mills on each dollar of taxable property, and must call any such election within three months
after the receipt by the said governing body of a petition for the calling of such election signed by
not less than five percent of the qualified electors of Mobile county; provided, however,
that not more than one election upon the levy of the special tax or upon the increase in the rate
thereof, up to but not exceeding three mills as aforesaid, shall be held during any period of
twelve consecutive months. After the special tax shall have been levied for a period of five years,
the governing body of Mobile county may from time to time thereafter call other elections
hereunder on the question of the discontinuance of the tax or a reduction in the rate thereof, such
discontinuance or reduction to become effective for the tax year of the county next succeeding
the tax year during which any obligations of the board that may be outstanding at the time of the
election and that are payable out of or secured by any part of the special tax shall be finally
retired; and after said five year period, the said governing body must call an election on the
question of said discontinuance or reduction within three months after receipt by the said
governing body of a petition for such election signed by not less than five percent of the qualified
electors of Mobile county. If a majority of the qualified electors of Mobile county voting in any
election upon the discontinuance of the special tax or reduction of the rate thereof should vote in
favor of such discontinuance or reduction, then the special tax shall be discontinued or its rate
reduced, as the case may be, such discontinuance or reduction to become effective for the tax
year next succeeding the tax year when any of the aforesaid obligations outstanding at the time of
the election shall be retired; provided, however, that not more than one election upon
the discontinuance of the special tax or a reduction in the rate thereof shall be held during any
period of twelve consecutive months. If the special tax shall be discontinued or its rate reduced
pursuant to any election held hereunder, its levy or an increase in its rate up to the aforesaid
maximum of three mills may be authorized at a subsequent election or elections held
hereunder, and the special tax may thereafter again be discontinued or reduced in rate pursuant to
subsequent election or elections held hereunder, it being the intention hereof that the power of
the governing body of Mobile county to call elections hereunder, and its duty to call them upon
receipt of petition as herein provided, shall be continuous, subject only to the
requirement that not more than one election may be held hereunder during any period of twelve
consecutive months. All elections held under the provisions of this amendment shall be called,
held, conducted, and canvassed in such manner as the governing body of Mobile county shall
prescribe.

D Not later than February 1 in each tax year for which the special tax may be authorized
hereunder to be levied, the board will certify to the governing body of Mobile county the rate of
the special tax, not exceeding the rate at the time authorized by vote of the qualified electors of
Mobile county as herein provided, that the board has determined should be levied in
order to supply the funds needed for public hospital purposes during the next ensuing fiscal year
of the board. During the month of February in each such tax year the governing body of Mobile
county shall levy the special tax at such rate as may be certified by the board to be necessary, up
to but not exceeding the rate then authorized as aforesaid, and the special tax so levied shall be
due and payable on the then ensuing October 1. If the board should fail to make such certification
with respect to the rate to be levied in any tax year, the governing body of Mobile county shall
levy the special tax for that tax year at the maximum rate then authorized by vote of the qualified
electors of the county as herein provided. All moneys derived from the collection of the special
tax (after deduction of costs of assessment and collection thereof pursuant to any statutory
provisions at the time applicable) shall be paid over to the board as received and used by the
board for public hospital purposes in the county. The board may anticipate the proceeds from the
special tax by issuing for any one or more public hospital purposes the bonds, warrants, or other
securities, of the board and may pledge for payment of the principal thereof and interest thereon
not exceeding 75% of the annual proceeds from the special tax. All such pledges of the special
tax shall take precedence in the order in which they are made and shall create a charge on the
special tax prior to the expenses of operating and maintaining any public hospital facilities.
Bonds and other securities issued by the board, including those that may be issued in anticipation
of the special tax and also any other securities issued by the board, shall not be deemed to
constitute debts of Mobile county within the meaning of section 224 of the Constitution and shall
not be
construed to be bonds of the county or of any political subdivision thereof within the meaning of
section 222 of the Constitution. 

E The rate of ad valorem taxation for general municipal purposes that is at the time otherwise
permitted by the Constitution to each particular municipal corporation in Mobile county shall be
reduced for the tax year of the municipality next succeeding any tax year of Mobile county for
which the special tax shall have been levied at a rate exceeding one and one-half mills on each
dollar of taxable property in the county, any such reduction to be by a rate of millage equal to the
rate of millage by which the special tax so levied shall exceed one and one-half mills on each
dollar of taxable property in the county.

F The rate of ad valorem taxation for general county purposes that is at the time otherwise
permitted to Mobile county by the Constitution shall be reduced, for any tax year for which the
special tax shall be levied, any such reduction to be by the same rate of millage at which the
special tax shall be levied for the same tax year or by one mill on each dollar of taxable
property in the county, whichever shall be the lesser reduction. 

G The rate of that certain ad valorem tax authorized by amendment XVIII [18] to the
Constitution, as amended by the amendment to the Constitution known as amendment XLII [42],
and provided for also in those certain amendments to the Constitution known as amendments LX
[60], C [100], CXXII [122], and CLI [151] and in the constitutional amendment proposed by that
certain act of the 1961 regular session of the legislature of Alabama that was introduced in the
said legislature as House Bill 1067 [amendment No. 193] shall be reduced, for each tax year for
which the special tax shall have been levied at a rate exceeding one mill on each dollar of taxable
property in the county, any such reduction to be by one-half mill on each dollar of taxable
property in the county or by a rate of millage equal to the rate by which the special tax levied for
that tax year exceeds one mill on each dollar of such taxable property, whichever shall be the
lesser reduction.

H Mobile county and each municipal corporation therein are hereby prohibited from making any
appropriation or payment to the board during any tax year of the county in which the special tax
shall be collected, except to provide funds for constructing and equipping public hospital
facilities, unless any such appropriation or payment shall have been authorized by a majority of
the qualified electors of the political subdivision proposing to make such appropriation or
payment at an
election held on the question in the said political subdivision.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 196 196.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 196 RATIFIED 1961

Costs and Charges of Courts, and Compensation of Certain Officers, in St. Clair County.

The legislature may, from time to time, by general or local laws, to become effective only if
approved by a majority of the qualified electors of St. Clair county voting at a referendum
election held not less than three months after the final adjournment of the legislative session at
which such law is enacted, fix, alter, and regulate the costs and charges of courts in St. Clair
county and the fees, commissions, percentages, allowances, and salary, including the method or
basis of their
compensation, to be charged or received by the judge of probate, sheriff, tax assessor, tax
collector, register, circuit clerk, and any other officer of St. Clair county, including the right to
place any of such officers on a salary and provide for the fees charged or collected by them to be
paid into the treasury from which their salaries shall be paid.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 197 197.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 197 RATIFIED 1961

Economic Development of St. Clair County and Municipalities Therein.

St. Clair county and the incorporated municipalities therein, jointly or severally, after an election
held in accordance herewith shall have full and continuing power and authority to:

1 Purchase, construct, lease, or otherwise acquire real property, plants, buildings, factories,
works, facilities, machinery and equipment of any kind.

2 Lease, sell for cash or on credit, exchange, or give and convey any such property described in
subdivision 1 above, to any person, firm, association or corporation.

3 Promote local industrial, commercial, or agricultural development and the location of new
industries or businesses therein.

4 Become a stockholder in any corporation, association or company.

5 Lend its credit or to grant public moneys and things of value in aid of, or to, any individual,
firm, association, or corporation whatsoever.

6 Become indebted and to issue and sell interest bearing bonds, warrants (which may be payable
from funds to be realized in future years), notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness, to a principal amount not exceeding fifty percent of the assessed value of taxable
property therein as determined for state taxation, in order to secure funds for the purchase,
construction, lease or acquisition of any of the property described in subdivision 1 above or to be
used in furtherance of any of the other powers or authorities granted in this amendment. Such
obligations or evidences of indebtedness may (in addition to any pledge or pledges authorized by
subdivision 8 of this amendment) be issued upon the full faith and credit of the county or
municipality or may be limited as to the source of their payment.

7 Levy and collect annually, in addition to all other taxes now authorized or permitted, a special
tax or taxes of not exceeding two percent on the value of all taxable property therein as
determined for state taxation, in the same manner as other county or municipal taxes are levied
and collected. Such tax may be upon all property in the county or in any municipality in St. Clair
county or upon all property in any district to be specially improved and benefited by any
proposed
use or expenditure of the proceeds of such tax.

8 Pledge to the payment of any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of
indebtedness the annual proceeds from any such special tax or taxes and to obligate itself
irrevocably to continue to levy and collect such taxes annually until such obligations or evidences
of indebtedness are paid in full and to pledge thereto any rental or sales proceeds of property
leased or sold by it.

9 Create a public authority or corporation having such powers, managed and governed by such
board or governing body and subject to such limitations as the governing body of St. Clair county
may impose, by approving and filing a certificate to that effect in the office of the judge of
probate or the secretary of state, or their respective successors in function, and to delegate to such
public authority or corporation and its board or governing body all powers and authority
conferred in this amendment upon the county or any municipality.

The recital in any bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness that
they were issued pursuant to this amendment or that they were issued to provide funds to be used
in furtherance of any power or authority herein authorized or that any special tax herein
authorized has been pledged to the payment thereof shall be conclusive; no purchaser or holder
thereof need inquire further; and the levy and collection of such tax shall continue until the
principal of and interest on such obligations or evidences of indebtedness shall have been paid in
full. The bonds, warrants, notes or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued
hereunder shall not be considered an indebtedness of St. Clair county or any municipality therein
for the purpose of determining their borrowing capacity under sections 224 and 225 of the
Constitution; and the taxes herein authorized shall be in addition to those provided for or
permitted in sections 215 and 216 of the Constitution and all amendments thereto.

This amendment shall be self-executing; but the legislature may enact laws supplemental to this
amendment or in furtherance of the purposes and objectives hereinabove set forth.

Neither the county nor any municipality therein shall make any engagement or commitment or
undertake any project under the provisions hereof unless and until the proposition has been
approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the locality affected thereby. The governing
body of the county or any municipality may provide for holding such elections, but in no
case shall an election be held until notice of the election and of the proposition to be voted on has
been published for at least three successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 198 198.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 198 RATIFIED 1961

Hospital Tax and Tax Anticipation Bonds, etc., in Tallapoosa County.

In addition to any taxes now authorized or that may be hereafter authorized by the Constitution
and laws of Alabama, the governing body of Tallapoosa county shall levy and cause to be
collected annually a special district tax, not exceeding 50 cents on each 100 dollars assessed
valuation of taxable property in districts three and four of Tallapoosa county, Alabama,
to be used exclusively for public hospital purposes (as the term "public hospital purposes" is
defined in amendment LXXVI [76] to the Constitution proposed by Acts of 1949, page 897,
submitted December 13, 1949, and proclaimed ratified December 21, 1949) within said districts
three and four; provided that the time during which such tax is to continue and the purpose
thereof shall have been first submitted to a vote of the qualified electors in districts three and four
of Tallapoosa county and voted for by a majority of such electors voting at such election. The
governing body of Tallapoosa county may call an election at any time, and it shall be the duty of
such governing body to call an election to be held within ninety days after receipt by it of a
petition signed by not less than 5% of the qualified electors of said districts three and four,
requesting that such election be called. The governing body may call such election to be held at
the same time that this amendment is submitted to the electors of the state for ratification and
such election shall be effective to require the levy and collection of such tax in the event that this
amendment shall be ratified. The notice of such election, ballots to be used at such election and
procedures for holding and determining the results of such election shall be prescribed by the
governing body of Tallapoosa county. No election shall be held hereunder within one year from
the date of the last election so held.

Whenever such tax shall have been authorized by vote of such qualified electors, and levied by
the governing body of Tallapoosa county, such governing body may anticipate the proceeds
therefrom for any one or more of the purposes for which the tax shall have been voted, by
issuing, without further election, interest bearing tax anticipation bonds, warrants, or certificates
of indebtedness of said county payable solely from and secured by a pledge of a sufficient
amount of the annual proceeds from said tax received by the county.

The governing body of Tallapoosa county shall have power to designate as the agency of the
county, to construct, acquire, equip, operate and maintain public hospital facilities for said
districts three and four, any public corporation heretofore or hereafter organized for hospital
purposes in the county. When a public corporation shall have been so designated, the proceeds of
said tax thereafter collected shall be paid to it and shall be used by it for any one or more of the
purposes for which the tax shall have been voted; provided, that payments of the proceeds of said
tax to said public corporation shall be made only to such extent as will not result in the
impairment of the obligation of any contract theretofore made with respect to said tax. Said
public corporation may anticipate the proceeds from said tax so required to be paid to it by
issuing, for any one or more of the purposes for which the tax shall have been voted, the bonds,
warrants, or certificates of indebtedness of said corporation, and may pledge for the payment of
the principal thereof and interest thereon a sufficient amount of the annual proceeds from said tax
so paid to it.

No securities issued or contracts made by Tallapoosa county under the authority of this
amendment, which are payable solely out of the proceeds of said tax, and no securities issued or
contracts made by any such public corporation, whether or not issued or made under the authority
of this amendment, shall be construed to be bonds of Tallapoosa county or of a political
subdivision thereof within the meaning of section 222 of the Constitution, or construed to create
or constitute an indebtedness of the county within the meaning of section 224 of the Constitution.
Said securities shall be construed to be negotiable instruments notwithstanding the fact that they
may be payable solely from a limited source. All pledges of said tax and all contracts made with
respect thereto pursuant to the provisions of this amendment shall take precedence in the order
in which they are made and shall create a charge on the proceeds of said tax prior to the expenses
of operating and maintaining any public hospital facilities.

The districts three and four of Tallapoosa county herein referred to are the districts three and four
provided for in Act No. 241, Local Laws of Alabama, approved September 7, 1923 (Local Acts
of 1923, pages 144, 145).

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 199 199.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 199 RATIFIED 1961

Special Tax and Bond Issue for Public Buildings in Washington County.

Section 1. Washington county may become indebted in an aggregate principal amount not
exceeding one million dollars in addition to the indebtedness of the county outstanding on the
effective date hereof, for the sole purpose of financing the construction and equipment of a
courthouse and jail and acquiring sites therefor. The county may issue and sell interest
bearing general obligation bonds and pledge to the payment of the principal thereof and interest
thereon the full faith and credit of the county and the proceeds of the special county tax provided
for in section 2.

Section 2. In addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized by law, the court of county
commissioners, board of revenue, or other like governing body of Washington county shall have
the power to levy and collect, for a period not exceeding twenty years, a special ad valorem tax
on property situated within said county, at a rate not exceeding four mills on each dollar of
property as assessed for state taxation for the preceding year, the proceeds of said tax to be used
solely for acquiring sites and constructing and equipping a courthouse and jail within said county
or to pay any debt incurred for that purpose pursuant to section 1. Before any special ad valorem
tax is levied, however, the question as to whether the tax shall be levied shall be first submitted
to a vote of the qualified electors of the county at an election to be called by the governing body
of the county, and shall be approved by a majority of the electors who vote thereon at said
election. The election shall be called, held, conducted and canvassed, and may be contested in the
same manner as provided by law for calling, holding, conducting and canvassing county bond
elections. Upon the expiration of any tax authorized pursuant to this amendment, no further tax
shall be authorized hereunder.

Section 3. In the event the qualified electors of Washington county do not authorize the levy of
the special county tax provided for in section 2 at any election called hereunder, then other
elections may be called by the county governing body from time to time until the electors of the
county do authorize and approve the levy, provided that not more than two elections shall be held
in the same year. If a majority of the electors of Washington county who participate in the
election as to the adoption of this constitutional amendment vote to approve the amendment,
such expression of the will of the electors of Washington county shall of itself authorize the
levying of the special tax provided for and the issuance of the bonds. Approval of the tax levy at
any election held hereunder shall be sufficient authority for issuance of the bonds as provided in
section 1. 

Section 4. Bonds issued pursuant to this amendment and the income therefrom shall be exempt
from taxation.

Section 5. The legislature may enact appropriate legislation to implement the provisions of this
amendment.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 200 200.0 9099.0 0 AL 1901 1961 ***

AMENDMENT 200 RATIFIED 1961

Bonds for Voting Machines.

Section 1. The several counties of the state may become indebted and issue and sell general
obligation bonds or other evidence of such indebtedness for the purpose of paying the cost of
installing and providing for the use of voting machines at all elections held within the county and
the municipalities therein, (any provision of article 12 of this Constitution to the contrary
notwithstanding). Such debts may be created and evidence thereof issued without a vote of the
qualified electors of the county, but any debt so created shall be repaid within 20 years from the
date of its creation.

Section 2. The legislature may enact general, special or local laws to enforce and implement this
amendment.                                   

*** MEND ***

