This is ready, although it still has some problems.
                                    
Amendments 80 through 226.

JW 9.12.02



*** CSTART NY 08/25/1938 99/99/9999 ***

*** MSTART 080 002.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***
                                    
Art. 5, Sec. 2.                                
2.  There shall be not more than twenty civil departments in the state government, including those referred to
in this constitution. The legislature may by law change the names of the departments referred to in this
constitution.

Amended November 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 081 003.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 5, section 3
3. Subject to the limitations contained in this constitution, the legislature may from time to time assign by
law new powers and functions to departments, officers, boards, commissions or executive officers of the
governor, and increase, modify or diminish their powers and functions. Nothing contained in this article
shall prevent the legislature from creating temporary commissions for special purposes or executive offices
of the governor and from reducing the number of departments as provided for in this article, by
consolidation, or otherwise.

Amended November 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 082 004.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 5, section 4
4. The head of the department of audit and control shall be the comptroller and of the department of law, the
attorney-general. The head of the department of education shall be The Regents of the University of the State
of New York, who shall appoint and at pleasure remove a commissioner of education to be the chief
administrative officer of the department.  The head of the department of agriculture and markets shall be
appointed in a manner to be prescribed by law.  Except as otherwise provided in this constitution, the heads
of all other departments and the members of all boards and commissions, excepting temporary commissions
for special purposes, shall be appointed by the governor by and with the advice and consent of the senate and
may be removed by the governor, in a manner to be prescribed by law. 

Amended November 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 083 001.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 1
1.  a.  There shall be a unified court system for the state.  The state-wide courts shall consist of the court of
appeals, the supreme including the appellate divisions thereof, the court of claims, the county court, the
surrogate's court, and the family court, as hereinafter provided.  The legislature shall establish in and for the
city of New York, as part of the unified court system for the state, a single, city-wide court of civil
jurisdiction and a single, city-wide court of criminal jurisdiction, as hereinafter provided, and may upon the
request of the mayor and the local legislative body of the city of New York, merge the two courts into the
one city-wide court of both civil and criminal jurisdiction.  The unified court system for the state shall also
include the district, town, city and village courts outside the city of New York, as hereinafter provided.
     b.  The court of appeals, the supreme court including the appellate divisions thereof, the court of claims,
the county court, the surrogates's court, the family court, the courts or court of civil and criminal jurisdiction
of the city of New York, and such other courts as the legislature may determine shall be courts of record.
     c.  All processes, warrants and other mandates of the court of appeals, the supreme court including the
appellate divisions thereof, the court of claims, the county court, the surrogate's court and the family court
may be served and executed in any part of the state.  All processes, warrants and other mandates of the
courts or court of civil and criminal jurisdiction of the city of New York may, subject to such limitation as
may be prescribed by the legislature, be served and executed in any part of the state.  The legislature may
provide that processes, warrants and other mandates of the district court may be served and executed in any
part of the state and that processes, warrants and other mandates of town, village and city courts outside the
city of New York may be served and executed in any part of the county in which such courts are located or
in any part of any adjoining county.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 084 002.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 2
2.  a.  The court of appeals is continued.  It shall consist of the chief judge, the six elected associate judges
now in office, who shall hold their offices until the expiration of their respective terms, and their successors,
who shall be chosen by the electors of the state and such justices of the supreme court as may be designated
for service in said court as hereinafter provided.  The official terms of the chief judge and elected associate
judges shall be fourteen years from and including the first day of January next after their election.  Five
members of the court shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of four shall be necessary to a decision;
but no more than seven judges shall sit in any case.  In case of the temporary absence or inability to act of
any judge of the court of appeals, the court may designate any justice of the supreme court to serve as
associate judge of the court during such absence or inability to act.  The court shall have the power to
appoint and remove its clerk.
     b.  Whenever and as often as the court of appeals shall certify to the governor that the court is unable, by
reason of the accumulation of causes pending therein, to hear and dispose of the same with reasonable speed,
the governor shall designate such number of justices of the supreme court as may be so certified to be
necessary, but not more than four, to serve as associate judges of the court of appeals.  The justices so
designated shall be relieved, while so serving, from their duties as justices of the supreme court, and shall
serve as associate judges of the court of appeals until the court shall certify that the need for the services of
any such justices no longer exists, whereupon they shall return to the supreme court.  The governor may fill
vacancies among such designated judges.  No such justices shall serve as associate judge of the court of
appeals except while holding the office of justice of the supreme court.  The designation of a justice of the
supreme as an associate judge of the court of appeals shall not be deemed to affect his existing office any
longer than until the expiration of his designation as such associate judge, nor to create a vacancy.
     c.  When a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, in the office of chief or elected
associate judge of the court of appeals, the same shall be filled, for a full term, at the next general election
held not less than three months after such vacancy occurs; and until the vacancy shall be so filled, the
governor, by and with the advice and consent of the senate if the senate shall be in session, or if not in
session, the governor may fill such vacancy by appointment.  If any such appointment be made from among
the justices of the supreme court, such appointment shall not be deemed to affect his existing office any
longer than until the expiration of his appointment as such associate judge, nor to create a vacancy.  If any
such appointment of chief judge shall be made from among the associate judges, a temporary appointment of
associate judge shall be made in like manner; but, in such case, the appointment shall not be deemed to
affect his office of associate judge any longer than until the expiration of his appointment as chief judge, nor
to create a vacancy.  The powers and jurisdiction of the court shall not be suspended for want of appointment
or election when the number of judges is sufficient to constitute a quorum.  All appointments under this
section shall continue until and including the last day of December next after the election at which the
vacancy shall be filled.  


Amended Nov. 7, 1961

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 085 003.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 3
3.  a. The jurisdiction of the court of appeals shall be limited to the review of questions of law except where
the judgement is of death, or where the appellate division, on reversing or modifying a final interlocutory
judgment in an action or a final order pursuant thereto is entered; but the right to appeal shall not depend
upon the amount involved.
b.  Appeals to the court of appeals may be taken in the classes of cases hereafter enumerated in this section;
     In criminal cases, directly from a court of original jurisdiction where the judgment is of death, and in
other criminal cases from an appellate division or otherwise as the legislature may from time to time
provide.
     In civil cases and proceedings as follows:
     (1) As of right, from a judgment or order entered upon the decision of an appellate division of the
supreme court which finally determines an action or special proceeding wherein is directly involved the
construction of the constitution of the state or of the United States, or where one or more of the justices of
the appellate division dissents from the decision of the court, or where the judgment or order is one of
reversal or modification.
     (2) As of right, from a judgment or order of a court of record of original jurisdiction which finally
determines an action or special proceeding where the only question involved on the appeal is the validity of
a statutory provision of the state or of the United States under the constitution of the state or of the United
States; and on any such appeal only the constitutional question shall be considered and determined by the
court.
     (3) As of right, from an order of the appellate division granting a new trial in an action or a new hearing
in a special proceeding where the appellant stipulates that, upon affirmance, judgement absolute or final
order shall be rendered against him.
     (4) From a determination of the appellate division of the supreme court in any department, other than a
judgment or order which finally determines an action or special proceeding, where the appellate division
allows the same and certifies that one or more questions of law have arisen which, in its opinion, ought to be
reviewed by the court of appeals, but in such case the appeal shall bring up for review only the question or
questions so certified; and the court of appeals shall certify to the appellate division its determination upon
such question or questions.
     (5) From an order of the appellate division of the supreme court in any department, in a proceeding
instituted by or against one or more public officers or a board, commission or other body of public officers
or a court or tribunal, other than an order which finally determines such proceeding, where the court of
appeals shall allow the same upon the ground that, in its opinion, a question of law is involved which ought
to be reviewed by it, and without regard to the availability of appeal by stipulation for final order absolute.
     (6) From a judgment or order entered upon the decision of an appellate division of the supreme court
which finally determines an action or special proceeding but which is not appealable under paragraph (1) of
this subdivision where the appellate division or the court of appeals shall certify that in its opinion a question
of law is involved which ought to be reviewed by the court of appeals.  Such an appeal may be allowed upon
application (a) to the appellate division, and in case of refusal, to the court of appeals, or (b) directly to the
court of appeals.  Such an appeal shall be allowed when required in the interest of substantial justice.
     (7) No appeal shall be taken to the court of appeals from a judgment or order entered upon the decision of
an appellate division of the supreme court in any civil case or proceeding where the appeal to the appellate
division was from a judgment or order entered in an appeal from another court, including an appellate or
special term of the supreme court, unless the construction of the constitution of the state or of the United
States is directly involved therein, or unless the appellate  division of the supreme court shall certify that in
its opinion a question of law is involved which ought to be reviewed by the court of appeals.
     (8) The legislature may abolish an appeal to the court of appeals as of right in any or all of the cases or
classes of cases specified in paragraph (1) of the subdivision wherein no question involving the construction
of the constitution of the state or of the United States is directly involved, provided, however, that appeals in
any such case or class of cases shall thereupon be governed by paragraph (6) of this subdivision.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 086 004.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 4
Section 4.  a.  The state shall be divided into four judicial departments.  The first department shall consist of
the counties within the first judicial district of the state.  The second department shall consist of the counties
within the second, ninth, tenth and eleventh judicial districts of the state.  The third department shall consist
of the counties within the third, fourth and sixth judicial districts of the state.  The fourth department shall
consist of the counties within the fifth, seventh and eight judicial districts of the state.  Each department shall
be bounded by the lines of judicial districts.  Once every ten years the legislature may alter the boundaries of
the judicial departments, but without changing the number thereof.
   b.  The appellate division of the supreme court are continued, and shall consist of seven justices of the
supreme court in each of the first and second departments, and five justices in each of the other departments. 
In each appellate division, four justices shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of three shall be
necessary to a decision.  No more than five justices shall sit in any case. 
   c.  The governor shall designate the presiding justice of each appellate division, who shall act as such
during his term of office and shall be a resident of the department.  The other justices of the appellate
divisions shall be designated by the governor, from all the justices elected to the supreme court, for terms of
five years or the unexpired portions of their respective terms of office, if less than five years.
   d.  The justices heretofore designated shall continue to sit in the appellate divisions until the terms of their
respective designations shall expire.  From time to time as the terms of the designations expire, or vacancies
occur, the governor shall make new designations.  He may also, on request of an appellate division, make
temporary designations in case of the absence or inability to act of any justice in such appellate division, for
service only during such absence or inability to act.
   e.  In case any appellate division shall certify to the governor that one or more additional justices are
needed for the speedy disposition of the business before it, the governor shall designate an additional justice
or additional justices; but when the need for such additional justice or justices shall no longer exist, the
appellate division shall so certify to the governor, and thereupon service under such designation or
designations shall cease.
   f.  A majority of the justices designated to sit in any appellate division shall at all times be residents of the
department.
  g.  Whenever the appellate division in any department shall be unable to dispose of its business within a
reasonable time, a majority of the presiding justices of the several departments, at a meeting called by the
presiding justice of the department in arrears, may transfer any pending appeals from such department to any
other department for hearing and determination.
  h.  A justice of the appellate division of the supreme court in any department may be temporarily
designated by the presiding justice of his department to the appellate division in another judicial department
upon the agreement by the presiding justices of the appellate division of the departments concerned.
  i.  In the event that the disqualification, absence or inability to act of justices in any appellate division
prevents there being a quorum of justices qualified to hear an appeal, the justices qualified to hear the appeal
may transfer it to the appellate division in another department for hearing and determination.  In the event
that the justices in any appellate division qualified to hear an appeal are equally divided, said justices may
transfer the appeal to the appellate division in another department for hearing and determination.  Each
appellate division shall have power to appoint and remove its clerk.
  j.  No justice of the appellate division shall, within the department to which he may be designated to
perform the duties of an appellate justice, exercise any of the powers of a justice of the supreme court, other
than those of a justice out of court, and those pertaining to the appellate division, except that he may decide
causes or proceedings theretofore submitted, or hear and decide motions submitted, or hear and decide
motions submitted by consent of counsel, but any such justice, when not actually engaged in performing the
duties of such appellate justice in the department to which he is designated, may hold any term of the
supreme court and exercise any of the powers of a justice of the supreme court in any judicial district in any
other department of the state.
  k.  The appellate divisions of the supreme court shall have all the jurisdiction possessed by them on the
effective date of this article and such additional jurisdiction as may be prescribed by law, provided, however,
that the right to appeal to the appellate divisions from a judgment or order which does not finally determine
an action or special proceeding may be limited or conditioned by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 087 005.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 5
5. a.  Upon an appeal from a judgment or an order, any appellate court to which the appeal is taken which is
authorized to review such judgment or order may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the
judgment or order appealed from, and each interlocutory judgment or intermediate or other order which it is
authorized to review, and as to any or all of the parties.  It shall thereupon render judgment of affirmance,
judgment of reversal and final judgment upon the right of any or all of the parties, or judgment of
modification thereon according to law, except where it may be necessary or proper to grant a new trial or
hearing, when it may grant a new trial or hearing.
  b.  If any appeal is taken to an appellate court which is not authorized to review such judgment or order, the
court shall transfer the appeal to an appellate court which is authorized to review such judgment or order.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 088 006.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 6
6. a. The state shall be divided into eleven judicial districts.  The first judicial district shall consist of the
counties of Bronx and New York.  The second judicial district shall consist of the counties of Kings and
Richmond.  The third judicial district shall consist of the counties of Albany, Columbia, Greene, Rensselaer,
Schoharie, Sullivan, and Ulster.  The fourth judicial district shall consist of the counties of Clinton, Essex,
Franklin, Fulton, Hamilton, Montgomery, St. Lawrence, Saratoga, Schenectady, Warren and Washington. 
The fifth judicial district shall consist of the counties of Herkimer, Jefferson, Lewis, Oneida, Onondaga, and
Oswego.  The sixth judicial district shall consist of the counties of Broome, Chemung, Chenango, Cortland,
Delaware, Madison, Otsego, Schuyler, Tioga and Tompkins.  The seventh judicial district shall consist of the
counties of Cayuga, Livingston, Monroe, Ontario, Seneca, Steuben, Wayne and Yates.  The eighth judicial
district shall consist of the counties of Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Niagara, Orleans
and Wyoming.  The ninth judicial district shall consist of the counties of Dutchess, Orange, Putnam,
Rockland and Westchester.  The tenth judicial district shall consist of the counties of Nassau and Suffolk. 
The eleventh judicial district shall consist of the county of Queens.
  b.  Once every ten years the legislature may increase or decrease the number of judicial districts or alter the
composition of judicial districts and thereupon re-apportion the justices to be thereafter elected in the
judicial districts so altered.  Each judicial district shall be bounded by county lines.
  c.  The justices of the supreme court shall be chosen by the electors of the judicial district in which they are
to serve.  The terms of justices of the supreme court shall be fourteen years from and including the first day
of January next after their election.
  d.  The supreme court is continued.  It shall consist of the number of justices of the supreme court including
the justices designated to the appellate divisions of the supreme court, judges of the county court of the
counties of Bronx, Kings, Queens and Richmond and judges of the court of general sessions of the county of
New York authorized by law on the thirty-first day of August next after the approval and ratification of this
amendment by the people, all of whom shall be justices of the supreme court for the remainder of their
terms.  The legislature may increase the number of justices of the supreme court in any judicial district,
except that the number in any district shall not be increased to exceed one justice for fifty thousand, or
fraction over thirty thousand, of the population thereof as shown by the last federal census or state
enumeration.  The legislature may decrease the number of justices of the supreme court in any judicial
district, except that the number in any district shall not be less than the number of justices of the supreme
court authorized by law on the effective date of this article.
  e.  The clerks of the several counties shall be clerks of the supreme court, with such powers and duties as
shall be prescribed by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 089 007.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 7
7. a.  The supreme court shall have general original jurisdiction in law and equity and the appellate
jurisdiction herein provided.  In the city of New York, it shall have exclusive jurisdiction over crimes
prosecuted by indictment, provided, however, that the legislature may grant to the city-wide court of
criminal jurisdiction of the city of New York jurisdiction over misdemeanors prosecuted by indictment and
to the family court in the city of New York jurisdiction over crimes and offenses by or against minors or
between spouses or between parent and child or between members of the same family or household.
  b.  There may be separate divisions of the supreme court established by the appellate division of the
supreme court in each department for various classes of actions and proceedings.
  c.  If the legislature shall create new classes of actions and proceedings, the supreme court shall have
jurisdiction over such classes of actions and proceedings, but the legislature may provide that another court
or other courts shall also have jurisdiction and that actions and proceedings of such classes may be
originated in such other court or courts.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 090 008.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 8
8. a.  The appellate division of the supreme court in each judicial department may establish an appellate term
in and for such department or in and for a judicial district or districts or in and for a county or counties
within the department and designate the place or places where such appellate term shall be held.  Such an
appellate term shall be composed of not less than three nor more than five justices of the supreme court who
shall be designated from time to time by the appellate division of the supreme court in the department and
who shall be residents of the department or of the judicial or districts as the case may be.
   b.  Any such appellate term may be discontinued and re-established as the appellate division of the
supreme court in each department shall determine from time to time and any designation to service therein
may be revoked by the appellate division of the supreme court so designating.
   c.  In each appellate term no more than three justices assigned thereto shall sit in any action or proceeding. 
Two of such justices shall constitute a quorum and the concurrence of two shall be necessary to a decision.
   d.  If so directed by the appellate division of the supreme court establishing an appellate term, an appellate
term shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals now or hereafter authorized to hear and determine
appeals now or hereafter authorized by law to be taken to the supreme court or to the appellate division other
than appeals from the supreme court, a surrogate's court, the family court or appeals in criminal cases
involving felonies prosecuted by indictment.
   e.  As may be provided by law, an appellate term shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals
from the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New York.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 091 009.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 9
9.  The court of claims is continued.  It shall consist of the eight judges now authorized by law, but the
legislature may increase such number and may reduce such number to six or seven.  The judges shall be
appointed by the governor by and with the advice and consent of the senate and their terms of office shall be
nine years.  The court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine claims against the state or by the state
against the claimant or between conflicting claimants as the legislature may provide.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 092 010.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 10
10.  a.  The county court is continued in each county outside the city of New York.  There shall be at least
one judge of the county court in each county and such number of additional judges in each county as may be
provided by law.  The judges shall be residents of the county and shall be chosen by the electors of the
county.
   b.  The terms of the judges of the county court shall be ten years from and including the first day of
January next after their election.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 093 011.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 11
11.  a.  The county court shall have jurisdiction over the following classes of actions and proceedings which
shall be originated in such county court in the manner provided by law, except that actions and proceedings
within the jurisdiction of the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New York may,
as provided by law, be originated therein: actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and
proceedings for the recovery of chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens
and liens on personal property where the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property does not
exceed six thousand dollars exclusive of interest and costs, provided, however, that the legislature, at the
request of the county board of supervisors or other elective governing body in any county, may increase such
amount in such county to any amount not exceeding ten thousand dollars exclusive of interest and costs;
over all crimes and other violations of law; over summary proceedings, to recover possession of real
property and to remove tenants therefrom; and over such other actions and proceedings,  not within the
exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be provided by law.
   b.  There may be separate divisions of the county court established by the appellate division of the supreme
court in each department for various classes of actions and proceedings.
   c.  The county court shall exercise such equity jurisdiction as may be provided by law and its jurisdiction
to enter judgment upon a counterclaim for the recovery of money only shall be unlimited.
   d.  The county court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all appeals arising in the county in the
following actions and proceedings: as of right, from a judgment or order of the district court or a town,
village or city court which finally determines an action or proceeding and, as may be provided by law, from
a judgment or order of any such court which does not finally determine an action or proceeding.  The
legislature may provide, in accordance with the provisions of section eight of this article, that any or all of
such appeals be taken to an appellate term of the supreme court instead of the county court.
   e. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section seven of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 094 012.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 12
12.  a.  The surrogate's court is continued in each county in the state.  There shall be at least one judge of the
surrogate's court in each county and such number of additional judges of the surrogate's court as may be
provided by law.
   b.  The judges of the surrogate's court shall be residents of the county and shall be chosen by the electors
of the county.
   c.  The terms of the judges of the surrogate's court in the city of New York shall be fourteen years, and in
other counties ten years, from and including the first day of January next after their election.
   d.  The surrogate's court shall have jurisdiction over all actions and proceedings relating to the affairs of
decedents, probate of wills, administration of estates and actions and proceedings arising thereunder or
pertaining thereto, guardianship of the property of minors, and such other actions and proceedings, not
within the exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be provided by law.
   e.  The surrogate's court shall exercise such equity jurisdiction as may be provided by law.
   f.   The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section of this article.


Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 095 013.0 006.0 0 NY 1961 1938 ***

Article 6, section 13
13.  a.  The family court of the state of New York is hereby established.  It shall consist of at least one judge
in each county outside the city of New York and such number of additional judges for such counties as may
be provided by law.  Within the city of New York it shall consist of such number of judges as may be
provided by law.  The judges of the family court within the city of New York shall be residents of such city
and shall be appointed by the mayor of the city of New York for terms of ten years.  The judges of the family
court outside the city of New York, shall be chosen by the electors of the counties wherein they reside for
terms of ten years.
   b.  The family court shall have jurisdiction over the following classes of actions and proceedings which
shall be originated in such family court in the manner provided by law: (l) the protection, treatment,
correction and commitment of those minors who are in need of the exercise of the authority of the court
because of circumstances of neglect, delinquency or dependency, as the legislature may determine; (2) the
custody of minors except for custody incidental to actions and proceedings for marital separation, divorce,
annulment of marriage and dissolution of marriage or except for custody in habeas corpus proceedings; (3)
the adoption of persons; (4) the support of dependents except for support incidental to actions and
proceedings in this state for marital separation, divorce, annulment of marriage or dissolution of marriage;
(5) the establishment of paternity; (6) proceedings for conciliation of spouses; and (7) as may be provided by
law: the guardianship of the person of minors and, in conformity with the provisions of section seven of this
article, crimes and offenses by or against minors or between spouses or between parent and child or between
members of the same family or household.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge the
authority or jurisdiction of courts to appoint guardians in cases originating in those courts.
   c.  The family court shall also have jurisdiction to determine, with the same powers possessed by the
supreme court, the following matters when referred to the family court from the supreme court: habeas
corpus proceedings for the determination of the custody of minors; and in actions and proceedings for
marital separation, divorce, annulment of marriage and dissolution of marriage, applications to fix temporary
or permanent support and custody, or applications to enforce judgments and orders of support and of
custody, or applications to modify judgments and orders of support and of custody which may be granted
only upon the showing to the family court that there has been a subsequent change of circumstances and that
modification is required.
   d.  The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section seven of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 096 014.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 14
14.  The legislature may at any time provide that outside the city of New York the same person may act and
discharge the duties of county judge and surrogate or of judge of the family court and surrogate, or of county
judge and judge of the family court, or of all three positions in any county.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 097 015.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 15
15.  a.  The legislature shall by law establish a single court of city-wide civil jurisdiction and a single court
of city-wide criminal jurisdiction in and for the city of New York and the legislature may, upon the request
of the mayor and the local legislative body of the city of New York, merge the two courts into one city-wide
court of both civil and criminal jurisdiction.  The said city-wide courts shall consist of such number of
judges as may be provided by law.  The judges of the court of city-wide civil jurisdiction shall be residents
of such city and shall be chosen for terms of ten years by the electors of the counties included within the city
of New York from districts within such counties established by law.  The judges of the court of city-wide
criminal jurisdiction shall be residents of such city and shall be appointed for terms of ten years by the mayor
of the city of New York.
   b.  The court of city-wide civil jurisdiction of the city of New York shall have jurisdiction over the
following classes of actions and proceedings which shall be originated in such court in the manner provided
by law: actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and proceedings for the recovery of
chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens and liens on personal property
where the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property does not exceed ten thousand dollars
exclusive of interest and costs, or such smaller amount as may be fixed by law; over summary proceedings
to recover possession of real property and to remove tenants therefrom and over such other actions and
proceedings, not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be provided by law.  The
court of city-side civil jurisdiction shall further exercise such equity jurisdiction as may be provided by law
and its jurisdiction to enter judgment upon a counterclaim for the recovery of money only shall be unlimited.
   c.  The court of city-wide criminal jurisdiction of the city of New York shall have jurisdiction over crimes
and other violations of law, other than those prosecuted by indictment, provided, however, that the
legislature may grant to said court jurisdiction over misdemeanors prosecuted by indictment; and over such
other actions and proceedings, not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be provided
by law.
   d.  The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section seven of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 098 016.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 16
16.  a.  The district court of Nassau county may be continued under existing law and the legislature may, at
the request of the board of supervisors or other elective governing body of any county outside the city of
New York, establish the district court for the entire area of such county or for a portion of such county
consisting of one or more cities, or one or more towns which are contiguous, or of a combination of such
cities and such towns provided at least one of such cities is contiguous to one of such towns.
   b.  No law establishing the district court for an entire county shall become effective unless approved at a
general election on the question of the approval of such law by a majority of the votes cast thereon by the
electors within the area of any cities in the county considered as one unit and by a majority of the votes cast
thereon by the electors within the area outside of cities in the county considered as one unit.
   c.  No law establishing the district court for a portion of a county shall become effective unless approved at
a general election on the question of the approval of such law by a majority of the votes cast thereon by the
electors within the area of any cities included in such portion of the county considered as one unit and by a
majority of the votes cast thereon by the electors within the area outside of cities included in such portion of
the county considered as one unit.
   d.  The district court shall have such jurisdiction as may be provided by law, but not in any respect greater
than the jurisdiction of the courts for the city of New York as provided in section fifteen of this article,
provided, however, that in actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and proceedings for
the recovery of chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens and liens on
personal property, the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property shall not exceed six
thousand dollars exclusive of interest and costs.
   e.  The legislature may create districts of the district court which shall consist of an entire county or of an
area less than a county.
   f.  There shall be at least one judge of the district court for each district and such number of additional
judges in each district as may be provided by law.
   g.  The judges of the district court shall be apportioned among the districts as may be provided by law, and
to the extent practicable, in accordance with the population and the volume of judicial business.
   h.  The judges shall be residents of the district and shall be chosen by the electors of the district.  Their
terms shall be six years from and including the first day of January next after their election.
   i.  The legislature may regulate and discontinue the district court in any county or portion thereof.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 099 017.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 17
17.  a.  Courts for towns, villages and cities outside the city of New York are continued and shall have the
jurisdiction prescribed by the legislature but not in any respect greater than the jurisdiction of the district
court as provided in section sixteen of this article.
   b.  The legislature may regulate such courts, establish uniform jurisdiction, practice and procedure for city
courts outside the city of New York and may discontinue any village or city court outside the city of New
York existing on the effective date of this article.  The legislature may discontinue any town court existing
on the effective date of this article only with the approval of a majority of the total votes cast at a general
election on the question of a proposed discontinuance of the court in each such town affected thereby.
   c.  The legislature may abolish the legislative functions on town boards of justices of the peace and provide
that town councilmen be elected in their stead.
   d.  The number of the judges of each of such town, village and city courts and the classification and duties
of the judges shall be prescribed by the legislature.  The terms, method of selection and method of filling
vacancies for the judges of such courts shall be prescribed by the legislature, provided, however, that the
justices of town courts shall be chosen by the electors of the town for terms of four years from and including
the first day of January next after their election.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 100 018.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 18
18.  a.  Trial by jury is guaranteed as provided in article one of this constitution.  The legislature may provide
that in any court of original jurisdiction a jury shall be composed of six or of twelve persons and may
authorize any court which shall have jurisdiction over crimes and other violations of law, other then crimes
prosecuted by indictment, to try such matters without a jury, provided, however, that crimes prosecuted by
indictment shall be tried by a jury composed of twelve persons, unless a jury trial has been waived as
provided in section two article one of this constitution.
   b.  The legislature may provide for the manner of trial of actions and proceedings involving claims against
the state.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 101 019.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 19
19.  a.  The supreme court may transfer any action or proceeding, except one over which it shall have
exclusive jurisdiction which does not depend upon the monetary amount sought, to any other court having
jurisdiction of the subject matter within the judicial department provided that such other court has
jurisdiction over the classes of persons named as parties.  As may be provided by law, the supreme court
may transfer to itself any action or proceeding originated or pending in another court within the judicial
department other than the court of claims upon a finding that such a transfer will promote the administration
of justice.
   b.  The county court shall transfer to the supreme court or surrogate's court or family court any action or
proceeding which has not been transferred to it from the supreme court or surrogate's court or family court
and over which the county court has no jurisdiction.   The county court may transfer any action or
proceeding, except a criminal action or proceeding involving a felony prosecuted by indictment or an action
or proceeding required by this article to be dealt with in the surrogate's court or family court, to any court,
other than the supreme court, having jurisdiction of the subject matter within the county provided that such
other court has jurisdiction over the classes of persons named as parties.
   c.  As may be provided by law, the supreme court or the county court may transfer to the county court any
action or proceeding originated or pending in the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city
of New York upon a finding that such a transfer will promote the administration of justice.
   d.  The surrogate's court shall transfer to the supreme court or the county court or the family court or the
courts for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article any action or proceeding
which has not been transferred to it from any of said courts and over which the surrogate's court has no
jurisdiction.
   e.  The family court shall transfer to the supreme court or the surrogate's court or the county court or the
courts for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article any action or proceeding
which has not been transferred to it from any of said courts and over which the family court has no
jurisdiction.
   f.  The courts for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article shall transfer to
the supreme court or the surrogate's court or the family court any action or proceeding which has not been
transferred to them from any of said courts and over which the said courts for the city of New York have no
jurisdiction.
   g.  As may be provided by law, the supreme court shall transfer any action or proceeding to any other court
having jurisdiction of the subject matter in any other judicial district or county provided that such other court
has jurisdiction over the classes of persons named as parties.
   h.  As may be provided by law, the county court, the surrogate's court, the family court and the courts for
the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article may transfer any action or
proceeding, other than one which has previously been transferred to it, to any other court, except the
supreme court, having jurisdiction of the subject matter in any other judicial district or county provided that
such other court has jurisdiction over the classes of persons named as parties.
   i.  As may be provided by law, the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New
York may transfer any action or proceeding, other than one which has previously been transferred to it, to
any court, other than the county court or the surrogate's court or the family court or the supreme court,
having jurisdiction of the subject matter in the same or an adjoining county provided that such other court
has jurisdiction over the classes of persons named as parties.
   j.  Each court shall exercise jurisdiction over any action or proceeding transferred to it pursuant to this
section.
   k.  The legislature may provide that the verdict or judgment in actions and proceedings so transferred shall
not be subject to the limitation of monetary jurisdiction of the court to which the actions and proceedings are
transferred if that limitation be lower than that of the court in which the actions and proceedings were
originated.
  
Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 102 020.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 20 
20.  a.  No person, other than one who holds such office at the effective date of this article, may assume the
office of judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, or judge of the court of claims unless he
has been admitted to practice law in this state at least ten years.  No person, other than one who holds such
office at the effective date of this article, may assume the office of judge of the county court, surrogate's
court, family court, a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article,
district court or city court outside the city of New York unless he has been admitted to practice law in this
state at least five years or such greater number of years as the legislature may determine.
   b.  A judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, judge of the court of claims, judge of a
county court, judge of the surrogate's court, judge of the family court or judge of a court for the city of New
York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article who is elected or appointed after the effective date
of this article may not:
   (1)  hold any other public office or trust except member of a constitutional convention or member of the
armed forces of the United States or of the state of New York in which latter event the legislature may enact
such legislation as it deems appropriate to provide for a temporary judge or justice to serve during the period
of the absence of such judge or justice in the armed forces;
   (2) be eligible to be a candidate for any public office other than judicial office or member of a
constitutional convention, unless he resigns his judicial office; in the event a judge or justice does not so
resign his judicial office within ten days after his acceptance of the nomination of such other office, his
judicial office shall become vacant and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this article;
   (3) hold any office or assume the duties or exercise the powers of any office of any political organization
or be a member of any governing or executive agency thereof;
   (4) engage in the practice of law, act as an arbitrator, referee or compensated mediator in any action or
proceeding or matter or engage in the conduct of any other profession or business which interferes with the
performance of his judicial duties.
   c.  Qualifications for and restrictions upon the judges of district, town, village or city courts outside the
city of New York, other than such qualifications and restrictions specifically set forth in subdivision a of this
section, shall be prescribed by the legislature, provided, however, that the legislature shall require a course
of training and education to be completed by justices of town and village courts selected after the effective
date of this article who have not been admitted to practice law in this state.
Section 21.  a.  When a vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term, in the office of justice of
the supreme court, of judge of the county court, of judge of the surrogate's court or judge of the family court
outside the city of New York, it shall be filled for a full term at the next general election held not less than
three months after such vacancy occurs and, until the vacancy shall be so filled, the governor by and with the
advice and consent of the senate, if the senate shall be in session, or, if the senate not be in session, the
governor may fill such vacancy by an appointment which shall continue until and including the last day of
December next after the election at which the vacancy shall be filled.
   b.  When a vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term, in the office of judge of the court of
claims, it shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
   c.  When a vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term, in the office of judge elected to the
city-wide court of civil jurisdiction of the city of New York, it shall be filled for a full term at the next
general election held not less than three months after such vacancy occurs and, until the vacancy shall be so
filled, the mayor of the city of New York may fill such vacancy by an appointment which shall continue until
and including the last day of December next after the election at which the vacancy shall be filled.  When a
vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term on the last day of December of any year, in the
office of judge appointed to the family court within the city of New York or the city-wide court of criminal
jurisdiction of the city of New York, the mayor of the city of New York shall fill such vacancy by an
appointment for the unexpired term.
   d.  When a vacancy shall occur, otherwise than by expiration of term, in the office of judge of the district
court, it shall be filled for a full term at the next general election held not less than three months after such
vacancy occurs and, until the vacancy shall be so filled, the board of supervisors or the supervisor or
supervisors of the affected district if such district consists of a portion of a county or, in counties with an
elected county executive officer, such county executive officer may, subject to confirmation by the board of
supervisors or the supervisor or supervisors of such district, fill such vacancy by an appointment which shall
continue until and including the last day of December next after the election at which the vacancy shall be
filled.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 103 022.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 22
22.  a.  Any judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, judge of the court of claims, judge of
the county court, judge of the surrogate's court or judge of the family court may be removed for cause or
retired for mental or physical disability preventing the proper performance of his judicial duties after due
notice and hearing by a court on the judiciary.
   b.  The court on the judiciary shall be composed of the chief judge of the court of appeals, the senior
associate judge of the court of appeals and one justice of the appellate division of the supreme court.  In the
absence, inability or disqualification of the chief judge of the court of appeals or of the senior associate judge
of the court of appeals, the court of appeals shall designate a judge or judges from the court of appeals to act
in his or their stead.  The chief judge of the court of appeals shall act as the presiding officer of the court but
in the absence, inability or disqualification of the chief judge, the senior associate judge of the court of
appeals sitting on the court shall act as the presiding officer.
   c.  The affirmative concurrence of not less than four members of the court shall be necessary for removal
or retirement and the court may disqualify a judge or justice removed from office from again holding any
public office of this state.  Proceedings to remove or the removal of a judge or justice from office shall not
prevent his indictment and punishment according to law.  A judge or justice retired for disability in
accordance with this section shall thereafter receive such compensation as may be provided by law.      
   d.  The chief judge of the court of appeals may convene the court on the judiciary upon his own motion
and shall convene the court upon written request by the governor or by a presiding justice of the appellate
division of the supreme court or by a majority of the executive committee of the New York State Bar
Association thereunto duly authorized.  The court in its discretion may suspend the judge or justice from the
exercise of his office pending the determination of the removal or retirement proceedings before the court.
   e.  After the court on the judiciary has been convened and charges of removal or retirement have been
preferred against a judge or justice, the presiding officer of the court on the judiciary shall, before a hearing
on charges of removal for cause commences, give written notice to the governor, the temporary president of
the senate and the speaker of the assembly of the name of the judge or justice against whom charges have
been preferred, the nature of the charges and the date set for hearing these charges, which shall not be less
than sixty days after the giving of such notice.  Immediately upon receipt of such notice, the legislature shall
be deemed to be in session for the purpose of this proceeding.  If any member of the legislature prefers the
same charges against the judge or justice concerned within thirty days after receipt of such notice and if such
charges are entertained by a majority vote of the assembly, proceedings before the court on the judiciary
shall be stayed pending the determination of the legislature which shall be exclusive and final.  But a
proceeding by the court on the judiciary for the retirement of a judge or justice for mental or physical
disability preventing the proper performance of his judicial duties shall not be stayed.
   f.  The court on the judiciary shall have power to designate an attorney or attorneys at law to act as counsel
to conduct the proceeding, to summon witnesses to appear and testify under oath and to compel the
production of books, papers, documents and records before such counsel in advance of the trial and before
the court upon the trial, to grant immunity from prosecution or punishment when the court deems it
necessary and proper in order to compel the giving of testimony under oath and the production of books,
papers, documents and records, and to make its own rules and procedures for the investigation and trial.
   g.  The court on the judiciary shall have such further powers and duties as may be provided by law.
   h.  The judges or justices while exercising the powers of a court on the judiciary shall serve without
additional compensation but the legislature shall provide moneys by appropriation to meet the expenses of
the court.
   i.  A judge of the courts for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article, of
the district court or of a town, village or city court outside the city of New York may, in the manner provided
by law, be removed for cause or retired for disability after due notice and hearing by the appellate division of
the supreme court of the judicial department of his residence.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 104 023.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 23
23.  a.  Judges of the court of appeals and justices of the supreme court may be removed by concurrent
resolution of both houses of the legislature, if two-thirds of all the members elected to each house concur
therein.
   b.  Judges of the court of claims, the county court, the surrogate's court, the family court, the courts for the
city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article, the district court and such other
courts as the legislature may determine may be removed by the senate, on the recommendation of the
governor, if two-thirds of all the members elected to the senate concur therein.
   c.  No judge or justice shall be removed by virtue of this section except for cause, which shall be entered
on the journals, nor unless he shall have been served with a statement of the cause alleged, and shall have
had an opportunity to be heard.  On the question of removal, the yeas and nays shall be entered on the
journal.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 105 024.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 24
24.  The assembly shall have the power of impeachment by a vote of a majority of all the members elected
thereto.  The court for the trial of impeachments shall be composed of the president of the senate, the
senators, or the major part of them, and the judges of the court of appeals, or the major part of them.  On the
trial of an impeachment against the governor or lieutenant-governor, neither the lieutenant-governor nor the
temporary president of the senate shall act as a member of the court.  No judicial officer shall exercise his
office after articles of impeachment against him shall have been preferred to the senate, until he shall have
been acquitted.  Before the trial of an impeachment, the members of the court shall take an oath or
affirmation truly and impartially to try the impeachment according to the evidence, and no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.  Judgement in cases of
impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office, or removal from office and
disqualification to hold and enjoy any public office of honor, trust, or profit under this state; but the party
impeached shall be liable to indictment and punishment according to law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 106 025.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 25
25.  a.  The compensation of a judge of the court of appeals, a justice of the supreme court, a judge of the
court of claims, a judge of the county court, a judge of the surrogate's court, a judge of the family court, a
judge of a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article, a judge of the
district court or of a retired judge or justice shall be established by law and shall not be diminished during
the term of office for which he was elected or appointed.  Any judge or justice of a court abolished by
section thirty-five of this article, who pursuant to that section becomes a judge or justice of a court
established or continued by this article, shall receive without interruption or diminution for the remainder of
the term for which he was elected or appointed to the abolished court the compensation he had been
receiving upon the effective date of this article together with any additional compensation that may be
prescribed by law.
   b.  Each judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, judge of the court of claims, judge of
the county court, judge of the surrogate's court, judge of the family court, judge of a court for the city of
New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article and judge of the district court shall retire on
the last day of December in the year in which he reaches the age of seventy.  Each such former judge of the
court of appeals and justice of the supreme court may thereafter perform the duties of a justice of the
supreme court, with power to hear and determine actions and proceedings, provided, however, that it shall be
certificated in the manner provided by law that the services of such judge or justice are necessary to expedite
the business of the court and that he is mentally and physically able and competent to perform the full duties
of such office.  Any such certification shall be valid for a term of two years and may be extended as provided
by law for additional terms of two years.  A retired judge or justice shall serve no longer than until the last
day of December in the year in which he reaches the age of seventy-six.  A retired judge or justice shall be
subject to assignment by the appellate division of the supreme court of the judicial department of his
residence.  A retired judge or justice shall not be counted in determining the number of justices in a judicial
district for purposes of section six subdivision d of this article.
   c.  The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to any judge or justice who has not reached the
age of seventy-six and to whom it would otherwise have been applicable but for the fact that he reached the
age of seventy and retired before the effective date of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 107 026.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 26
26.  a.  A justice of the supreme court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and
may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district or to the court of claims.  A justice
of the supreme court in the city of New York or to the surrogate's court in any county within the city of New
York when required to dispose of the business of such court.
   b.  A judge of the court of claims may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may
be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district.
   c.  A judge of the county court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court
of the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York or to
a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.
   d.  A judge of the surrogate's court in any county within the city of New York may perform the duties of
his office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence.
   e.  A judge of the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York may perform the duties of
his office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to a court for the city
of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.  
   f.  A judge of the family court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the county court or the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any
county outside of the city of New York or to a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section
fifteen of this article.
   g.  A judge of a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article may
perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme
court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to
the other court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.
   h.  A judge of the district court in any county may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any
county and may be temporarily assigned to the county court in the judicial department of his residence or to
a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article or to the district court
in any county.
   i.  Temporary assignments of all the foregoing judges or justices listed in this section shall be made by the
appellate division of the supreme court of the department or departments concerned.
   j.  The legislature may provide for temporary assignments within the county of residence or any adjoining
county, of judges of town, village or city courts outside the city of New York.
   k.  While temporarily assigned pursuant to the provisions of this section, any judge or justice shall have the
powers, duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which assigned.  After the expiration of
any temporary assignment, as provided in this section, the judge or justice assigned shall have all the
powers, duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which he was assigned with respect to
matters pending before him during the term of such temporary assignment.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 108 027.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 27
27.  The governor may, when in his opinion the public interest requires, appoint extraordinary terms of the
supreme court.  He shall designate the time and place of holding the term and the justice who shall hold the
term.  The governor may terminate the assignment of the justice and may name another justice in his place to
hold the term.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 109 028.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 28
28.  The authority and responsibility for the administrative supervision of the unified court system for the
state shall be vested in the administrative board of the judicial conference.  The administrative board of the
judicial conference.  The administrative board shall consist of the chief judge of the court of appeals, as
chairman, and the presiding justices of the appellate divisions of the four judicial department.  The
administrative board, in consultation with the judicial conference, shall establish standards and
administrative policies for general application throughout the state.  The composition and functions of the
judicial conference shall be as now or hereafter provided by law.  In accordance with the standards and
administrative policies established by the administrative board, the appellate divisions shall supervise the
administration and operation of the courts in their respective department.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 110 029.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 29
29.  a.  The legislature shall provide for the allocation of the cost of operating and maintaining the court of
appeals, the appellate division of the supreme court in each judicial department, the supreme court, the court
of claims, the county court, the surrogate's court, the family court, the courts for the city of New York
established pursuant to section fifteen of this article and the district court, among the state, the counties, the
city of New York and other political subdivisions.
   b.  The legislature shall provide for the submission of the itemized estimates of the annual financial needs
of the courts referred to in subdivision a of this section to the administrative board of the judicial conference
or to the said conference to be forwarded to the appropriating bodies with recommendations and comment.
   c.  Insofar as the expense of the courts is borne by the state or paid by the state in the first instance, the
final determination of the itemized estimates of the annual financial needs of the courts shall be made by the
legislature and the governor in accordance with articles four and seven of this constitution.
   d.  Insofar as the expense of the courts is not paid by the state in the first instance and is borne by counties,
the city of New York or other political subdivisions, the final determination of the itemized estimates of the
annual financial needs of the courts shall be made by the appropriate governing bodies of such counties, the
city of New York or other political subdivisions.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 111 030.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 30
30.  The legislature shall have the same power to alter and regulate the jurisdiction and proceedings in law
and in equity that it has heretofore exercised.  The legislature may, on such terms as it shall provide and
subject to subsequent modification, delegate, in whole or in part, to a court, including the appellate division
of the supreme court, to the administrative board of the judicial conference, or to the judicial conference, any
power possessed by the legislature to regulate practice and procedure in the courts.  Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the adoption of regulations by individual courts consistent with the general practice
and procedure as provided by statute or general rules.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 112 031.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 31
31.  This article does not apply to the peacemakers courts or other Indian courts, the existence and operation
of which shall continue as may be provided by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 113 032.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 32
32.  When any court having jurisdiction over a child shall commit it or remand it to an institution or agency
or place it in the custody of any person by parole, placing out, adoption or guardianship, the child shall be
committed or remanded or placed, when practicable, in an institution or agency governed by persons, or in
the custody of a person, of the same religious persuasion as the child.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 114 033.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 33
33.  Existing provisions of law not inconsistent with this article shall continue in force until repealed,
amended, modified or superseded in accordance with the provisions of this article.  The legislature shall
enact appropriate laws to carry into effect the purposes and provisions of this article, and may, for the
purpose of implementing, supplementing or clarifying any of its provisions, enact any laws, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this article, necessary or desirable in promoting the objective of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 115 034.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 34
34.  a.  The court of appeals, the appellate division of the supreme court, the supreme court, the court of
claims, the county court in counties outside the city of New York, the surrogate's court and the district court
of Nassau county shall hear and determine all appeals, actions and proceedings pending therein on the
effective date of this article except that the appellate division of the supreme court in the first and second
judicial departments or the appellate term in such departments, if so directed by the appropriate appellate
division of the supreme court, shall hear and determine all appeals pending in the appellate terms of the
supreme court in the first and second judicial departments and in the court of special sessions of the city of
New York and except that the county court or an appellate term shall, as may be provided by law, hear and
determine all appeals pending in the county court of the supreme court other than an appellate term.  Further
appeal form a decision of the county court, the appellate term or the appellate division of the supreme court,
rendered on or after the effective date of this article, shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
   b.  The justices of the supreme court in office on the effective date of this article shall hold their offices as
judges of the court or claims until the expiration of their respective terms.
   d.  The surrogates, and county judges outside the city of New York, including the special county judges of
the counties of Erie and Suffolk, in office on the effective date of this article shall hold office as judges of
the surrogate's court or county judge, respectively, of such counties until the expiration of their respective
terms.
   f.  Judges of courts for towns, villages and cities outside the city of New York in office on the effective
date of this article shall hold their offices until the expiration of their respective terms.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 116 035.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 35
35.  a.  The children's courts, the court of general sessions of the county of New York, the county courts of
the counties of Bronx, Kings, Queens and Richmond, the city court of the city of New York, the domestic
relations court of the city of New York, the municipal court of the city of New York, the court of special
sessions of the city of New York and the city magistrates' courts of the city of New York are abolished from
and after the effective date of this article and thereupon the seals, records, papers and documents of or
belonging to such courts shall, unless otherwise provided by law, be deposited in the offices of the clerks of
the several counties in which these courts now exist.
   b.  The judges of the county court of the counties of Bronx, Kings, Queens and Richmond and the judges
of the court of general sessions of the county of New York in office on the effective date of this article shall,
for the remainder of the terms for which they were elected or appointed, be justices of the supreme court in
and for the judicial district which includes the county in which they resided on that date.  The salaries of
such justices shall be the same as the salaries of the other justices of the supreme court residing in the same
judicial district and shall be paid in the same manner.  All actions and proceedings pending in the county
court of the counties of Bronx, Kings, Queens and Richmond and in the court of general sessions of the
county of New York on the effective date of this article shall be transferred to the supreme court in the
county in which the action or proceedings was pending, or otherwise as may be provided by law.
   c.  The legislature shall provide by law that the justices of the city court of the city of New York and the
justices of the municipal court of the city of New York in office on the date such courts are abolished shall,
for the remainder of the term for which each was elected or appointed, be judges of the city-wide court of
civil jurisdiction of the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article and for such
district as the legislature may determine.
   d.  The legislature shall provide by law that the justices of the court of special sessions and the magistrates
of the city magistrates' court of the city of New York in office on the date such courts are abolished shall, for
the remainder of the term for which each was appointed, be judges of the city-wide court of criminal
jurisdiction of the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen provided, however, that each term
shall expire on the last day of the year in which it would have expired except for the provisions of this
article.
   e.  All actions and proceedings pending in the city court of the city of New York and the municipal court in
the city of New York on the date such courts are abolished shall be transferred to the city-wide court of civil
jurisdiction of the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article or as otherwise
provided by law.
   f.  All actions and proceedings pending in the court of special sessions of the city of New York and the city
magistrates' courts of the city of New York on the date such courts are abolished shall be transferred to the
city-wide court of criminal jurisdiction of the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this
article or as otherwise provided by law.
   g.  The special county judges of the counties of Broome, Chautauqua, Jefferson, Oneida and Rockland and
the judges of the children's courts in all counties outside the city of New York in office on the effective date
of this article shall, for the remainder of the terms for which they were elected or appointed, be judges of the
family court in and for the county in which they hold office.  Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the office of special county judge and the office of special surrogate is abolished from and after the effective
date of this article and the terms of the persons holding such offices shall terminate on that date.
   h.  All actions and proceedings pending in the children's courts in counties outside the city of New York
on the effective date of this article shall be transferred to the family court in the respective counties.
   i.  The justices of the domestic relations court of the city of New York in office on the effective date of this
article shall, for the remainder of the terms for which they were appointed, be judges of the family court
within the city of New York.
   j.  All actions and proceedings pending in the domestic relations court of the city of New York on the
effective date of this article shall be transferred to the family court in the city of New York.
   k.  The office of official referee is abolished, provided, however, that official referees in office on the
effective date of this article shall, for the remainder of the terms for which they were appointed or certified,
be official referees of the court in which appointed or certified or the successor court, as the case may be.  At
the expiration of the term of any official referee, his office shall be abolished and thereupon such former
official referee shall be subject to the relevant provisions of section twenty-five of this article.
   l.  As may be provided by law, the non-judicial personnel of the courts affected by this article in office on
the effective date of this article shall, to the extent practicable, be continued without diminution of salaries
and with the same status and rights in the courts established or continued by this article; and especially
skilled, experienced and trained personnel shall, to the extent practicable, be assigned to like functions in the
courts which exercise the jurisdiction formerly exercised by the courts in which they were employed.  In the
event that the adoption of this article shall require or make possible a reduction in the number of non-judicial
personnel, or in the number of certain categories of such personnel, such reduction shall be made, to the
extent practicable, by provision that the death, resignation, removal or retirement of an employee shall not
create a vacancy until the reduced number of personnel has been reached
   m.  In the event that a judgment or order was entered before the effective date of this article and a right of
appeal existed and notice of appeal therefrom is filed after the effective date of this article, such appeal shall
be taken from the supreme court, the county courts, the surrogate's courts, the children's courts, the court of
general sessions of the county of New York and the domestic relations court of the city of New York to the
appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial department in which such court was located; from the
court of claims to the appellate division of the supreme court in the third judicial department, except for
those claims which arose in the fourth judicial department, in which case the appeal shall be to the appellate
division of the supreme court in the fourth judicial department; from the city court of the city of New York,
the municipal court of the city of New York, the court of special sessions of the city of New York and the
city magistrates' courts of the city of New York to the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial
department in which such court was located, provided, however, that such appellate division of the supreme
court may transfer any such appeal to an appellate term, if such appellate term be established; and from the
district court, town, village and city courts outside the city of New York to the county court in the county in
which such court was located, provided, however, that the legislature may require the transfer of any such
appeal to an appellate term, if such appellate term be established.  Further appeal from a decision of a county
court or an appellate term or the appellate division of the supreme court shall be governed by the provision
of this article.  However, if in any action or proceeding decided prior to the effective date of this article, a
party had a right of direct appeal from a court of original jurisdiction to the court of appeals, such appeal
may be taken directly to the court of appeals.
   n.  In the event that an appeal was decided before the effective date of this article and a further appeal
could be taken as of right and notice of appeal therefrom is filed after the effective date of this article, such
appeal may be taken from the appellate division of the supreme court to the court of appeals and from any
other court to the appellate division of the supreme court.  Further appeal from a decision of the appellate
division of the supreme court shall be governed by the provisions of this article.  If a further appeal could not
be taken as of right, such appeal shall be governed by the provisions of this article.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 916 036.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 36
36.  No civil or criminal appeal, action or proceeding pending before any court or any judge or justice on the
effective date of this article shall abate but such appeal, action or proceeding so pending shall be continued
in the courts as provided in this article and, for the purposes of the disposition of such actions or proceedings
only, the jurisdiction of any court to which any such action or proceeding is transferred by this article shall
be coextensive with the jurisdiction of the former court from which the action or proceeding was transferred. 
Except to the extent inconsistent with the provisions of this article, subsequent proceedings in such appeal,
action or proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the laws in force on the effective date of this
article until superseded in the manner authorized by law.

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 117 037.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Article 6, section 37
37.  This article shall become a part of the constitution on the first day of January next after the approval and
ratification of this amendment by the people but its provisions shall not become operative until the first day
of September next thereafter which date shall be deemed the effective date of this article.  

Amended Nov. 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 118 005.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Section 5, which dealt with certain offices abolished, was repealed by amendment November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 119 007.0 010.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Art. 10, Sec. 7.
7. Not withstanding any provision of this or any other article of this constitution, the legislature may by law,
which shall take effect without submission to the people, make or authorize making the state liable for the
payment of the principal of and interest on bonds of a public corporation to be created pursuant to and for
the purposes specified in the last paragraph of section eight of article seven of this constitution, in a principal
amount not to exceed fifty million dollars, maturing in not to exceed thirty years after their respective dates,
and for the principal of and interest on notes of such corporation issued in anticipation of such bonds, which
notes and any renewals thereof shall mature within five years after the respective dates of such notes. 

New section added by amendment Number 4 approved November 7, 1961. Another Article 10, section 7
was approved at the same election.  See amendment number 120.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 120 007.0 010.0 1 NY 1938 1961 *** 

Article 10, section 7
7.  Notwithstanding any provision of this or any other article of this constitution, the legislature may by law,
which shall take effect without submission to the people, make or authorize making the state liable for the
payment of the principal of and interest on obligations of the port of New York authority issued pursuant to
legislation heretofore or hereafter enacted, to purchase or refinance the purchase of, or to repay advances
from this state made for the purpose of purchasing, railroad rolling stock used in passenger transportation,
for the purpose of leasing such cares to any railroad transporting passengers between municipalities int eh
portion of the port of New York district within the state, the majority of the trackage of which within the
port of New York district utilized for the transportation of passengers shall be in the state; provided,
however, that the total amount of obligations with respect to which the state may be made liable shall not
exceed one hundred million dollars at any time, and that all of such obligations shall be due not later than
thirty-five years after the effective date of this section.
To the extent payment is not otherwise made or provided for, the provisions of section sixteen of article
seven shall apply to the liability of the state incurred pursuant to this section, but the powers conferred by
this section shall not be subject to the limitations of this or any other article.

New.  Added November 7, 1961.  Another new section 7 of article 10 was added on the same date.  See
amendment number 119.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 121 008.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1961 ***

Art. 7, Sec. 8.
8. The money of the state shall not be given or loaned to or in aid of any private corporation or association,
or private undertaking; nor shall the credit of the state be given or loaned to or in aid of any individual, or
public or private corporation or association, or private undertaking, but the foregoing provisions shall not
apply to any fund or property now held or which may hereafter be held by the state for educational purposes.
     Subject to the limitations on indebtedness and taxation, nothing in this constitution contained shall pre-

vent the legislature from providing for the aid, care support of the needy directly or through subdivisions of
the state; or for the protection by insurance or otherwise, against the hazards of unemployment sickness and
old age; or for the education and support of the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the physically handicapped and
juvenile delinquents as it may deem proper; or for health and welfare services for all children, either directly
or through subdivisions of the state, including school districts; or for the aid, care and support of neglected
and dependent children and of the needy sick, through agencies and institutions authorized by the state board
of social welfare or other state department having the power of inspection thereof, by payments made on a
per capita basis directly or through the subdivisions of the state; or for the increase in the amount of pensions
of any member of a retirement system of the state, or of a subdivision of the state. The enumeration of
legislative powers in this paragraph shall not be taken to diminish any power of the legislature hitherto
existing.
     Nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent the legislature from authorizing the loan of the money
of the state to a public corporation to be organized for the purpose of making loans to non-profit
corporations to finance the construction of new industrial or manufacturing plants in this state or the
acquisition, rehabilitation or, improvement of former industrial or manufacturing plants in this state,
including the acquisition of real property therefor, and the use of such money by such public, corporation for
such purposes, to provide additional employment in those areas of the state in which unemployment is or
may hereafter become a critical problem, provided, however, that any loan by such public corporation shall
not exceed thirty per centum of the cost of any such project and the repayment of which shall be secured by a
mortgage thereon which shall not be a junior incumbrance thereon by more than fifty per centum of such
cost.

Amended November 7, 1961.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 122 002.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***  

Art. 13, Sec. 2.
2. When the duration of any office is not provided by this constitution it may be declared by law, and if not
so declared, such office shall be held during the pleasure of the authority making the appointment. 

Formerly section 6, renumbered section 2 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 2 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 123 003.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 13, Sec. 3.
3. The legislature shall provide for filling vacancies in office, and in case of elective officers, no person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold his office by virtue of such appointment longer than the
commencement of the political year next succeeding the first annual election after the happening of the
vacancy. 

Formerly section 8, renumbered section 3 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 3 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 124 004.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 13, Sec. 4.
4. The political year and legislative term shall begin on the first day of January; and the legislature shall,
every year, assemble on the first Wednesday afer the first Monday in January.  

Formerly section 9, renumbered section 4 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 4 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 125 005.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 13, Sec. 5.
5. Provision shall be made by law for the removal for misconduct or malversation in office of all officers,
except judicial, whose powers and duties are not local or legislative and who shall be elected at general
elections, and also for supplying vacancies created by such removal. 

Formerly section 10, renumbered section 5 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 5 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 126 006.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 13, Sec. 6.
6.  The legislature may declare the cases in which any office shall be deemed vacant when no provision is
made for that purpose in this constitution. 

Formerly section 11, renumbered section 6 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 6 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 127 007.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 13, Sec. 7.
7.  No officer whose salary is fixed by this constitution shall receive any additional compensation.  Each of
the other state officers named in this constitution shall, during his continuance in office, receive a
compensation, to be fixed by law, which shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he
shall have ben elected or appointed; nor shall he receive to his use any fees or perquisites of office or other
compensation.

Formerly section 12, renumbered section 7 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962;
former section 7 repealed by same amendment. This section will further be amended as section 12 on
November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 128 009.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 13, section 9 renumbered Article 13, section 4 by amendment approved November 6, 1962. 

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 129 010.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 13, section 10 renumbered Article 13, section 5 by amendment approved November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 130 011.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 13, section 11 renumbered Article 13, section 6 by amendment approved November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 131 012.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 13, section 12 renumbered Article 13, section 7 by amendment approved November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 132 003.0 011.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 11, Sec. 3.
3. Neither the state nor any subdivision thereof shall use its property or credit or any public money, or
authorize or permit either to be used, directly or indirectly, in aid or maintenance, other than for examination
or inspection, of any school or institution of learning wholly or in part under the control or direction of any
religious denomination, or in which any denominational tenet or doctrine is taught, but the legislature may
provide for the transportation of children to and from any school or institution of learning.  

Formerly section 4, renumbered section 3 without change by amendment November 6, 1962; former section
4 repealed by same amendment.

*** MEND ***

ARTICLE XII

*** MSTART 133 001.0 012.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 12, Sec. 1.
l.  The defense and protection of the state and of the united States is an obligation of all person within the
state.  The legislature shall provide for the discharge of this obligation and for the maintenance and
regulation of an organized militia.

New article (comprised of one section)  adopted November 6, 1962, repealing and replacing former article
adopted November 8, 1938.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 134 003.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Art. 3, Sec. 3.
3. The senate districts described in section three of article three of this constitution as adopted by the people
on November sixth, eighteen hundred ninety-four are hereby continued for all of the purposes of future
reapportionments of senate districts pursuant to section four of this article. 

Former section 3 repealed and replaced by new section 3 amended November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 135 010.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 1, section 10 repealed November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 136 013.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1962 ***

Article 1, Section 13 repealed November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***

*** MSTART 137 002.0 002.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 2, Sec. 2.
2. The legislature may, by general law, provide a manner in which, and the time and place at which,
qualified voters who, on the occurrence of any election, may be absent from the comity of their residence or,
if residents of the city of New York, from the city, and qualified voters who, on the occurrence of any
election, may be unable to appear personally at the polling place because of illness or physical disability,
may vote and for the return and canvass of their votes. 

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 138 009.0 002.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 2, Sec. 9.
9. Notwithstanding the residence requirements imposed by section one of this article, the legislature may by
general law, provide special procedures  whereby every person who shall have moved from another state to
this state or from one county, city or village within this state to another county, city or village within this
state and who shall have been an inhabitant of this state in any event for ninety days next preceding an
election at which electors are to be chosen for the office of president and vice president of the United States
shall be entitled to vote in this state solely for such electors, provided such person is otherwise qualified to
vote in this state and is not able to qualify to vote for such electors in any other state. The legislature may
also, by general law, prescribe special procedures whereby every person who is registered and would be
qualified to vote in this state but for his removal from this state to another state within one year next
preceding such election shall be entitled to vote in this state solely for such electors, provided such person is
not able to qualify to vote for such electors in any other state. 

New. Added November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 139 009.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 3, Sec. 9.
9. A majority of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business. Each house shall determine the rules of
its own proceedings, and be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its own members; shall
choose its own officers; and the senate shall choose a temporary president and the assembly shall choose a
speaker.  

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 140 003.0 004.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 4, Sec. 3.
3. The governor shall be commander-in-chief of the military and naval forces of the state. He shall have
power to convene the legislature, or the senate only, on extraordinary occasions. At extraordinary sessions
no subject shall be acted upon, except such as the governor may recommend for consideration. He shall
communicate by message to the legislature at every session the condition of the state, and recommend such
matters to it as he shall judge expedient. He shall expedite all such measures as may be resolved upon by the
legislature, and shall take care that the laws are faithfully executed. He shall receive for his services an
annual salary to be fixed by joint resolution of the senate and assembly, and there shall be provided for his
use a suitable and furnished executive residence. 

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 141 005.0 004.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 4, Sec. 5.
5. In case of the removal of the governor from office or of his death or resignation, the lieutenant-governor
shall become governor for the remainder of the term.
     In case the governor-elect shall decline to serve or shall die, the lieutenant-governor-elect shall become
governor for the full term.
     In case the governor is impeached, is absent from the state or is otherwise unable to discharge the powers
and duties of his office, the lieutenant-governor shall act as governor until the inability shall cease or until
the term of the governor shall expire.
     In case of the failure of the governor-elect to take the oath of office at the commencement of his term, the
lieutenant-governor-elect shall act as governor until the governor shall take the oath.  

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 142 006.0 004.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 4, Sec. 6.
6. The lieutenant-governor shall possess the same qualifications of eligibility for office as the governor. He
shall be the president of the senate but shall have only a casting vote therein. The lieutenant-governor shall
receive for his services an annual salary to be fixed by joint resolution of the senate and assembly.
     In case of vacancy in the offices of both governor and lieutenant-governor, a governor and lieutenant-
governor shall be elected for the remainder of the term at the next general election happening not less than
three months after both offices shall have become vacant. No election of a lieutenant-governor shall be had
in any event except at the time of electing a governor.
     In case of vacancy in the offices of both governor and lieutenant-governor or if both of them shall be
impeached, absent from the state or otherwise unable to discharge the powers, and duties of the office of
governor, the temporary president of the senate shall act as governor until the inability shall cease or until a
governor shall be elected.
     In case of vacancy in the office of lieutenant-governor alone, or if the lieutenant-governor shall be
impeached, absent from the state or otherwise unable to discharge the duties of his office, the temporary
president of the senate shall perform all the duties of lieutenant-governor during such vacancy or inability.
    If, when the duty of acting as governor devolves upon the temporary president of the senate, there be a
vacancy in such office or the temporary president of the senate shall be absent from the state or otherwise
unable to discharge the duties of governor, the speaker of the assembly shall act as governor during such
vacancy or inability.
     The legislature may provide for the devolution of the duty of acting as governor in any case not provided
for in this article. 

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 143 007.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1963 *** 

Art. 13, Sec. 7.
7. Each of the state officers named in this constitution shall, during his continuance in office, receive a
compensation, to be fixed by law, which shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which lie
shall have been elected or appoint; nor shall he receive to his use any fees or perquisites of office or other
compensation. 

Formerly section 12.  Renumbered section 7 November 6, 1962 and amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 144 025.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 3, Sec. 25.
25. Notwithstanding any other provision of this constitution, the legislature, in order to insure continuity of
state and local governmental operations in periods of emergency caused by enemy attack or by disasters
(natural or otherwise), shall have the power and the immediate duty (1) to provide for prompt and temporary
succession to the powers and duties of public offices, of whatever nature and whether filled by election or
appointment, the incumbents of which may become unavailable for carrying on the powers and duties of
such offices, and (2) to adopt such other measures as may be necessary and proper for insuring the continuity
of governmental operations.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit in any way the power of the state to deal with
emergencies arising from any cause. 

New.  Added November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 145 012.0 008.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 8, Sec. 12.
12. It shall be the duty of the legislature, subject to the provisions of this constitution, to restrict the power of
taxation, assessment, borrowing money, contracting indebtedness, and loaning the credit of counties, cities,
towns and villages, so as to prevent abuses in taxation and assessments and in contracting of indebtedness by
them.  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the legislature from further restricting the powers
herein specified of any county, city, town, village or school district to contract indebtedness or to levy taxes
on real estate. The legislature shall not, however, restrict the power to levy taxes in real estate for the
payment of interest on or principal of indebtedness theretofore contracted. 

Amended November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 146 001.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 9, Sec. 1.                     
1. Effective local self-government and intergovernmental cooperation are purposes of the people of the state.
In furtherance thereof, local governments shall have the following rights, powers, privileges and immunities
in addition to those granted by other provisions of this constitution:

(a) Every local government, except a county wholly included within a city, shall have a legislative body
elective by the people thereof.  Every local government shall have power to adopt local laws as provided by
this article.

(b) All officers of every local government whose election or appointment is not provided for by this constitu-

tion shall be elected hy the people of the local government, or of some division thereof, or appointed by such
officers of the local government as may be provided by law.

(c) Local governments shall have power to agree, as authorized by act of the legislature, with the federal
government, a state or one or more other governments within or without the state, to provide cooperatively,
jointly or by contract any facility, service, activity or undertaking which each participating local government
has the power to provide separately. Each such local government shall have power to apportion its share of
the cost thereof upon such portion of its area as may be authorized by act of the legislature.

(d) No local government or any part of the territory thereof shall be annexed to another until the people, if
any, of the territory proposed to be annexed shall have consented thereto by majority vote on a referendum
and until the governing board of each local government, the area of which is affected, shall have consented
thereto upon the basis of a determination that the annexation is in the over-all public interest. The consent of
the governing board of a county shall be required only where a boundary of the county is affected. On or
before July first, nineteen hundred sixty-four, the legislature shall provide, where such consent of a
governing board is not granted, for adjudication and determination, on the law and the facts, in a proceeding
initiated in the supreme court, of the issue of whether the annexation is in the over-all public interest.

(e) Local governments shall have power to take by eminent domain private property within their boundaries
for public use together with excess land or property but no more than is sufficient to provide for appropriate
disposition or use of land or property which abuts on that necessary for such public use, and to sell or lease
that not devoted to such use. The legislature may authorize and regulate the exercise of the power of eminent
domain and excess condemnation by a local government outside its boundaries.

(f) No local government shall be prohibited by the legislature (1) from making a fair return on the value of
the property used and useful in its operation of a gas, electric or water public utility service, over and above
costs of operation and maintenance and necessary and proper reserves, in addition to an amount equivalent
to
taxes which such service, if privately owned, would pay to such local government, or (2) from using such
profits
for payment of refunds to consumers or for any other lawful purpose.

(g) A local government shall have power to apportion its cost of a governmental service or function upon
any portion of its area, as authorized by act of the legislature.

(h) Counties, other than those wholly included within a city, shall be empowered by general law, or by
special law enacted upon county request pursuant to section two of this article, to adopt, amend or repeal
alternative forms of county government provided by the legislature or to prepare, adopt, amend or repeal
alternative forms of their own. Any such form of government or any amendment thereof, by act of the
legislature or by local law, may transfer one or more functions or duties of the county or of the cities, towns,
villages, districts or other units of government wholly contained in such county to each other or when
authorized by the legislature to the state, or may abolish one or more offices, departments, agencies or units
of government provided, however, that no such form or amendment, except as provided in paragraph (2) of
this subdivision, shall become effective unless approved on a referendum by a majority of the votes cast
thereon in the area of the county outside of cities, and in the cities of the county, if any, considered as one
unit. Where an alternative form of county government or any amendment thereof, by act of the legislature or
by local law, provides for the transfer of any function or duty to or from any village or the abolition of any
office, department, agency or unit of government of a village wholly contained in such county, such form or
amendment shall not become effective unless it shall also be approved on the referendum by a majority of
the votes cast thereon in all the villages so affected considered as one unit.

(2) After the adoption of an alternative form of county government by a county, any amendment thereof by
act of the legislature or by local law which abolishes or creates an elective county office, changes the voting
or veto power of or the method of removing an elective county officer during his term of office, abolishes,
curtails or transfers to another county officer or agency any power of an elective county officer or changes
the form or composition of the county legislative body shall be subject to a permissive referendum as
provided by the legislature.

New.  Adopted November 5, 1963.  Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment
approved November 5, 1963, except for sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b),
and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of Article 13.

*** MEND *** 
*** MSTART 147 002.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Art. 9, Sec. 2.
2. (a) The legislature shall provide for the creation and organization of local governments in such manner as
shall secure to them the rights, powers, privileges and immunities granted to them by this constitution.

(b) Subject to the bill of rights of local governments ind other applicable provisions of this constitution, the
legislature:

(1) Shall enact, and may from time to time amend, a statute of local governments granting to local
governments powers including but not limited to those of local legislation and administration in addition to
the powers rested in them by this article. A power granted in such statute may be repealed, diminished,
impaired or suspended only by enactment of a statute by the legislature with the approval of the governor at
its regular session in one calendar year and the re-enactment and approval of such statute in the following
calendar year.

(2) Shall have the power to act in relation to the property, affairs or government of any local government
only
by general law, or by special law only (a) on request of two-thirds of the total membership of its legislative
body or on the request of its chief executive officer concurred in by a majority of such membership, or (b)
except in the case of the city of New York, on certificate of necessity from the governor reciting facts which
in his judgment constitute an emergency requiring enactment of such law and, in such latter case, with the
concurrence of two-thirds of the members elected to each house of the legislature.

(3) Shall have the power to confer on local governments powers not relating to their property, affairs or
government including but not limited to those of local legislation and administration, in addition to those
otherwise granted by or pursuant to this article, and to withdraw or restrict such additional powers.

(c) In addition to powers granted in the statute of local governments or any other law, (i) every local
government shall have power to adopt and amend local laws not inconsistent with the provisions of this
constitution or any general law relating to its property, affairs or government and, (ii) every local
government shall have power to adopt and amend local laws not inconsistent with the provisions of this
constitution or any general law relating to the following subjects, whether or not they relate to the property,
affairs or government of such local government, except to the extent that the legislature shall restrict the
adoption of such a local law relating to other than the property, affairs or government of such local
government:

(1) The powers, duties, qualifications, number, mode of selection and removal, terms of office,
compensation, hours of work, protection, welfare and safety of its officers and employees, except that cities
and towns shall not have such power with respect to members of the legislative body of the county in their
capacities as county officers.
(2) In the case of a city, town or village, the membership and composition of its legislative body.
(3) The transaction of its business.
(4) The incurring of its obligations, except that local laws relating to financing by the issuance of evidences
of indebtedness by such local government shall be consistent with laws enacted by the legislature.
(5) The presentation, ascertainment and discharge of claims against it.
(6) The acquisition, care, management and use of its highways, roads, streets, avenues and property.
(7) The acquisition of its transit facilities and the ownership and operation thereof.
(8) The levy, collection and administration of local taxes authorized by the legislature and of assessments for
local improvements, consistent with laws enacted by the legislature.
 (9) The wages or salaries, the hours of work or labor, and the protection, welfare and safety of persons
employed by any contractor or sub-contractor performing work, labor or services for it.
(10) The government, protection, order, conduct, safety, health and well-being of persons or property
therein.

(d) Except in the case of it transfer of functions under an alternative form of county government, a local
government shall not have power to adopt local laws which impair the powers of any other local
government.

(e) The rights and powers of local governments specified in this section insofar as applicable to any county
within the city of New York shall be vested in such city.

New.  Adopted November 5, 1963.  Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment
approved November 5, 1963, except for sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b),
and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 148 003.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

3. (a) Except as expressly provided, nothing it this article shall restrict or impair any power of the legislature
in relation to:

(1) The maintenance, support or administration of the public school system, as required or provided by
article XI of this constitution, or any retirement system pertaining to such public school system,

(2) The courts as required or provided by article VI of this constitution, and

(3) Matters other than the property, affairs or government of a local government.

(b) The provisions of this article shall not affect any existing valid provisions of acts of the legislature or of
local legislation and such provisions shall continue in force until repealed, amended, modified or superseded
in accordance with the provisions of this constitution.

(c) Rights, powers, privileges and immunities granted to local governments by this article shall be liberally
construed.

(d) Whenever used in this article the following terms, shall mean or include:

(1) "General law." A law which in terms and in effect applies alike to all counties, all counties other than
those wholly included within a city, all cities, all towns or all villages.

(2) "Local government." A county, city, town or village.

(3) "People." Persons entitled to vote as provided in section one of article two of this constitution.

(4) "Special law." A law which in terms and in effect applies to one or more, but not all, counties, counties
other than those wholly included within a city, cities, towns or villages.

New.  Adopted November 5, 1963.  Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment
approved November 5, 1963, except for sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b),
and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 149 004.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 4 of Article 9 repealed Nov. 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 150 005.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 5 of Article 9 renumbered subdivision (a) of new section 13 of Article 13.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 151 006.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 6 of Article 9 renumbered subdivision (b) of new section 13 of Article 13.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 152 007.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 7 of Article 9 repealed Nov. 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 153 008.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 8 of Article 9 renumbered subdivision (c) of new section 13 of Article 13.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 154 009.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 9 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 155 010.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 10 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 156 011.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 11 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 157 012.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 12 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 158 013.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 13 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 159 014.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 14 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 160 015.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 15 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 161 016.0 009.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Section 16 of Article 9 repealed November 5, 1963.
Entire text of former Article 9 repealed and replaced by amendment approved November 5, 1963, except for
sections 5, 6, and 8, which were renumbered subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), respectively, of new section 13 of
Article 13.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 162 013.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 13, section 13
13. (a) Except in counties in the city of New York and except as authorized in section one of article nine of
this constitution, sheriffs, clerks of counties, district attorneys, and registers in counties having registers,
shall be chosen by the electors of the respective counties once every three years and whenever the occurring
of vacancies shall require.  Sheriffs shall hold no other office. They may be required by law to renew their
security, from time to time; and in default of giving such new security, their offices shall be deemed vacant.
But the county shall never be made responsible for the acts of the sheriff. The governor may remove any
elective sheriff, county clerk, district attorney or register within the term for which he shall have been
elected; but before so doing he shall give to such officer a copy of the charges against him and  an
opportunity of being heard in his defense. In each county in the city of New York a district attorney shall be
chosen by  the electors once in every two or four years as the legislature shall direct. The clerk of each
county in the city of New York shall be appointed, and be subject to removal,  by the appellate division of
the supreme court in the judicial department in which tile county is located. In addition to his powers and
duties as clerk of the supreme court, he shall have power to select, draw, summon  and empanel grand and
petit jurors in the manner and under the conditions now or hereafter prescribed by law, and shall have such
other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by the city from time to time by local law.
 
   (b) Any district attorney who shall fail faithfully to prosecute a person charged with the violation in his
county of any provision of this article which may come to his knowledge, shall be removed from office by
the governor, after due notice and an opportunity of being heard in his defense. The expenses which shall be
incurred by any county, in investigating and prosecuting any person holding office under the laws of this
state, within such county, or of receiving bribes by any such person in said county, shall be a charge against
the state, and their payment by the state shall be provided by law.
  
   (c) The city of New York is hereby vested with power from time to time to abolish by local law, as defined
by the legislature, the office of any county officer within the city other than judges, clerks of counties and
district attorneys, and to assign any or all functions of such officers to city officers, courts or clerks of
counties, and to prescribe the powers, duties, qualifications, number, mode of selection and removal, terms
of office and compensation of the persons holding such offices and the employees therein, and to assign to
city officers any powers or duties of clerks of counties not assigned by this constitution. The legislature shall
not pass any law affecting any such matters in relation to such offices within the city of New York except on
message from the governor declaring that an emergency exists and the concurrent action of two-thirds of the
members of each house, except that existing laws regarding each such office shall continue in force, and may
be amended or repealed by the legislature as heretofore, until the power herein granted to the city has been
exercised with respect to that office. The provisions of article nine shall not prevent the legislature from
passing general or special laws  prescribing or affecting powers and duties of such city officers or such
courts or clerks to whom or which functions of such county officers shall have been so assigned, in so far as
such powers or duties embrace subjects not relating to property, affairs of government of such city. 

New added November 5, 1963. Subdivisions (a), (b) and (c), are formerly sections 5, 6, and 8 of Art. 9.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 163 014.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 13, section 14
14. The legislature may regulate and fix regulate and fix the wages or salaries and the hours of work or labor,
and make provisions for the protection, welfare and safety, of persons employed by the state or by any
county, city, town, village or other civil division  of the state, or by any contractor or subcontractor
performing work, labor or services for the state or for any county, city, town, village or other civil division
thereof. 

New. Added by amendment approved November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 164 005.0 008.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 8, section 5
5. In ascertaining the power of  a county, city, town, village  to contract indebtedness, there shall be
excluded:

A. Certificates or other evidences of indebtedness (except serial bonds of an issue having a maximum
maturity of more than two years) issued for purposes other, than the financing of capital improvements and
contracted to be redeemed in one of the two fiscal years immediately succeeding the year of their issue, and
certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued in an fiscal year in anticipation of  (a) the collection of
taxes on real estate amounts theretofore actually levied and uncollected or to be levied in such year and
payable out of such taxes, (b)  moneys receivable from the state which have theretofore been apportioned by
the state or which are to be so apportioned within one year after their issue and (c) the collection of any other
taxes due and payable or to become due and payable within one year after their  issue; excepting any such
certificates or other evidences of indebtedness or renewals thereof which are not retired within five years
after their date of original issue.

B. Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted to provide for the supply of water.

C. Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted by any county, city, town or village for a public
improvement or part thereof, or service, owned or rendered by such county, city, town or village, annually
proportionately to the extent that the same shall have yielded to such county, city, town or village net
revenue; provided, however, that such net revenue shall be twenty-five per centum or more of the amount
required in such year for the payment of the interest on, amortization of, or payment of, such indebtedness.
Such exclusion shall be granted only if the revenues of such public improvement or part thereof, or service,
are applied to and actually used for payment of all costs of operation, maintenance and repairs, and payment
of the amounts required in such year for interest on and amortization of or redemption of such indebtedness,
or such revenues are deposited in a special fund to be used solely for such payments. Any revenues
remaining after such payments are made may be used for any lawful purpose of such county, city, town or
village, respectively.
    Net revenue shall be determined by deducting from gross revenues of the preceding year all costs of
operation, maintenance and repairs for such year, or the legislature may provide that net revenue shall be
determined by deducting from the average of the gross revenues of not to exceed five of the preceding years
during which the public improvement or part thereof, or service, has been in operation, the average of all
costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for the same years.
    A proportionate exclusion of indebtedness contracted or proposed to be contracted also may be granted for
the period from the date when such indebtedness is first contracted or to be contracted for such public
improvement or part thereof, or service.  Such exclusion shall be computed in the manner provided in this
section on the basis of estimated net revenue which shall he determined by deducting from the gross
revenues estimated to be received during the first year of operation of such public improvement or part
thereof, or service, all estimated costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for such year. The amount of
any such proportionate exclusion shall not exceed seventy-five per centum of the amount which would be
excluded if the computation were made on the basis of net revenue instead of estimated net revenue. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms
and conditions under which the proportionate amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded shall be
determined and no proportionate amount of such indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with
such determination. The legislature may provide that the state comptroller shall make such determination or
it may confer appropriate jurisdiction on the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial
departments in which such counties, cities, towns or villages are located for the purpose of determining the
proportionate amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded.
   The provisions of this paragraph C shall not affect or impair any existing exclusions of  indebtedness, or
the power to exclude indebtedness, granted by any other provision of this constitution.

   D. Serial  bonds, issued by any county,  city, town or village which now maintains a pension or retirement
system or fund which is not on an actuarial reserve basis  current payments  to the reserve adequate to
provide for all current accruing
liabilities.  Such bonds shall not exceed in the aggregate an amount sufficient to provide for the payment of
the liabilities of such system or fund, accrued on the date of issuing such bonds, both on account of
pensioners on the pension roll on that date and prospective pensions to dependents of such pensioners and
on account of prior service of active members of such system or fund on that date.. Such bonds or the
proceeds thereof shall be deposited in such system or fund. Each such pension or retirement system or fund
thereafter shall he maintained on an actuarial reserve basis with current payments to the reserve adequate to
provide for all current accruing liabilities.

   Indebtedness contracted on or after January first, nineteen hundred sixty-two and prior to January first,
nineteen hundred seventy-three, for the construction or reconstruction of facilities for the conveyance,
treatment and disposal of sewage. The legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms and
conditions under which the amount of  any such indebtedness to be excluded shall be determined, and no
such indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with such determination. 

Paragraph E added November 5, 1963.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 165 001.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 14, section 1
1.  The lands of the state, now owned or hereafter acquired, constituting the forest preserve as now fixed by
law, shall be forever kept as wild forest lands.  They shall not be leased, sold, or exchanged, or be taken by
any corporation, public or private, nor shall the timber thereon be sold, removed or destroyed.  Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the state from constructing, completing and maintaining any highway
heretofore specifically authorized by constitutional amendment, nor from constructing and maintaining to
federal standards federal aid interstate highway route five hundred two from a point in the vicinity of the city
of Glens Falls, thence northerly to the vicinity of the villages of lake George and Warrensburg, the hamlets
of South Horicon and Pottersville and thence northerly in a generally straight line on the west side of
Schroon Lake to the vicinity of the hamlet of Schroon, then continuing northerly to the vicinity of Schroon
Falls, Schroon River and North Hudson, and to the east of Makomis Mountain, east of the hamlet of New
Russia, east of the village of Elizabethtown and continuing northerly in the vicinity of he hamlet of Towers
Forge, and east of Poke-O-Moonshine Mountain and continuing northerly to the vicinity of the village of
Keesville and the city of Plattsburg, all of the aforesaid taking not to exceed a total of three hundred acres of
state forest preserve land, nor from constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails
thirty to eighty feet wide on the north, east and northwest slopes of Whiteface Mountain in Essex county, nor
from constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together
with appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of Belleayre Mountain in Ulster and Delaware counties and not
more than thirty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together with appurtenances thereto, on the
slopes of gore, Southand Pete Gay mountains in Warren county, nor from relocating, reconstructing and
maintaining a total of not more than fifty miles of existing state highways for the purpose of eliminating the
hazards of dangerous curves and grades, provided a total of no more than four hundred acres of forest
preserve land shall be used for such purpose and that no single relocated portion of any highway shall exceed
one mile in length.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may convey to the village of Saranac
Lake ten acres of forest preserve land adjacent to the boundaries of such village for public use in providing
for refuse disposal and in exchange therefor the village of Saranac Lake shall convey to the state thirty acres
of certain true forest land owned by such village on roaring Brook in the northern half of Lot 113, Township
11, Richards Survey. 

Amended November 5, 1953.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 166 007.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

7. (a) Private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation.
   (b) When private property shall be taken for any public use, the compensation to be made therefor, when
such compensation   is not made by the state, shall be ascertained by a jury, or by the supreme court without
a jury, but not with a referee other than an official referee, or by not less than three commissioners appointed
by a court of record, as shall be prescribed by law.
   (c) Private roads may be opened in the manner to be prescribed by law; but in every case the necessity of
the road and the amount of all damage to be sustained by the opening thereof shall be first determined by a
jury of freeholders, and such amount, together with the expenses of the proceedings, shall be paid by the
person to be benefitted.
   (d) The use of property for the drainage of swamp or agricultural lands is declared to be a public use, and
general laws
may be passed permitting the owners or occupants of swamp or agricultural lands to construct and maintain
for the 
drainage  thereof, necessary drains, ditches and dykes upon the lands of others, under proper restrictions, on
making just just compensation, and such compensation together with the cost of such drainage may be
assessed, wholly or partly, against any property benefitted thereby; but no special laws shall be enacted for
such purposes. 

Amended November 5, 1963. Subdivision (e) repealed.  

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 167 007.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1964 ***

Article 1, section 7
7.  (a) Private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation.
   (c) Private roads may be opened in the manner to be prescribed by law; but in every case the necessity of
the road and the amount of all damage to be sustained by the opening thereof shall be first determined by a
jury of freeholders, and such amount, together with the expenses of the proceedings, shall be paid by the
person to be benefitted.
   (d) The use of property for the drainage of swamp or agricultural lands is declared to be a public use, and
general laws may be passed permitting the owners or occupants of swamp or agricultural lands to construct
and maintain for the drainage  thereof, necessary drains, ditches and dykes upon the lands of others, under
proper restrictions, on making just just compensation, and such compensation together with the cost of such
drainage may be assessed, wholly or partly, against any property benefitted thereby; but no special laws shall
be enacted for such purposes. 

Amended November 3, 1964.  Subdivision (b) repealed.                     

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 168 006.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1964 ***

Article 3, section 6
6. Each member of the legislature shall receive for his services a like annual salary, to be fixed by law.  He
shall also be
reimbursed for his actual traveling expenses in going to and returning from the place in which the legislature
meets, not
more than once each week while the legislature is in session. Senators, when the senate alone is convened in
extraordinary session, or when serving as members of the court for the trial of impeachments, and such
members of the assembly, not exceeding nine in number, as shall be appointed managers of an
impeachment, shall receive an additional per diem allowance, to be fixed by law. Any member, while
serving as an officer of his house or in any other special capacity therein or directly connected therewith not
hereinbefore in this section specified, may also be paid and receive, in addition, any
allowance which may be fixed by law for the particular and additional services appertaining to or entailed by
such office or special capacity. Neither the salary of any member nor any other allowance so fixed may be
increased or diminished during, and with respect to, the term for which lie shall have been elected, nor shall
he be paid or receive any other extra compensation. The provisions of this section and laws enacted in
compliance therewith shall govern and be exclusively controlling, according to their terms. Members shall
continue to receive such salary and additional allowance as heretofore fixed and provided in this section,
until changed by law pursuant to this section. 

Amended November 3, 1964.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 169 017.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1964 ***

Article 3, section 17
17. The legislature shall not pass a private or local bill in any of the following cases:
   Changing the names of persons.
   Laying out, opening, altering, working or discontinuing roads, highways or alleys, or for draining swamps
or other low lands.
   Locating or changing county seats.
   Providing for changes of venue in civil or criminal cases.
   Incorporating villages.
   Providing for election of members of  boards of supervisors.
   Selecting, drawing, summoning or empaneling grand or petit jurors.
   Regulating the rate of interest on money.
   The opening and conducting of elections or designating places of voting.
   Creating, increasing or decreasing fees, percentages or allowances of public officers, during the term for
which said officers are elected or appointed.
   Granting to any corporation, association or individual the right to lay down railroad tracks.
   Granting to any private corporation, association or individual any exclusive privilege, immunity or
franchise whatever.             
Granting to any person, association, firm or corporation, an exemption from taxation on real or personal
property.
Providing for the building of bridges, except over the waters forming a part of the boundaries of the state, by
other than a municipal or other public corporation or a public agency of the state. 

Amended November 3, 1964.
 
*** MEND *** 
*** MSTART 170 018.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 3, section 18 repealed November 5, 1963.  Former provisions covered by Article 9, section 1.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 171 019.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 3, section 19
19. The legislature shall neither audit nor allow any private claim or account against the state, but may
appropriate money to pay such claims as shall have been audited and allowed according to law.
   No claim against the state shall be audited, allowed or paid which, as between citizens of the state, would
be barred by lapse of time. But if the claimant shall be under legal disability, the claim may be presented
within two years after such disability is removed. 

Amended November 3, 1964.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 172 005.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

Article 5, section 5 repealed November 6, 1962.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 173 006.0 005.0 0 NY 1938 1963 ***

6. Appointments and promotions in the civil service of the state and all of the civil divisions thereof,
including cities and villages, shall be made according to merit and fitness to be ascertained, as far as
practicable, by examination which, as
far as practicable, shall be competitive; provided, however, that any member of the armed forces of the
United States who served therein in time of war, who is a citizen and resident of the state and was a resident
at the time of his entrance into the armed forces of the United States and was honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from such service shall be entitled to receive five points additional
credit in a competitive examination for original appointment and two and one-half points additional credit in
an examination for promotion or, if such member was disabled in the actual performance of duty in any war,
is receiving disability payments therefor from the United States veteran administration, and his disability is
certified by such administration to be in existence at the time of his application for appointment or
promotion, he shall be entitled to receive ten points additional credit in an examination for promotion.  Such
additional credit shall be added to the final earned rating of such member after he has qualified in an
examination and shall be granted only at the time of establishment of an eligible list.  No such member shall
receive the additional credit granted by this section after he has received one appointment, either original
entrance or promotion, from an eligible list on which he was allowed the additional credit granted by this
section. 

Amended November 3, 1964.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 174 002.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 7, section 2
2. Annually, on or before the first day of February in each year following the year fixed by the constitution
for the election of governor and lieutenant governor, and on or before the second Tuesday following the first
day of the annual meeting of the legislature, in all other years, the governor shall submit to the legislature a
budget containing a complete plan of expenditures proposed to be made before the close of the ensuing
fiscal year and all moneys and revenues estimated to be available therefor, together with an explanation of
the basis of such estimates and recommendations as to proposed legislation, if any, which he may deem
necessary to provide moneys and revenues sufficient to meet such proposed expenditures.  It shall also
contain such other recommendations and information as he may deem proper and such additional
information as may be required by law.  

Amended November 2, 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 175 001.0 018.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 18, section 1
1. Subject to the provisions of this article, the legislature may provide in such manner, by such means and
upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe for low rent housing and nursing home accommodations
for persons of low income as   defined by law, or for the clearance, replanning, reconstruction and
rehabilitation of substandard and insanitary areas, or for both such purposes, and for recreational and other
facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto. 

Amended November 2, 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 176 002.0 018.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 18, section 2
2. For and in aid of such purposes, notwithstanding any provision in any other article of this constitution, but
subject to the limitations contained in this article, the legislature may: make or contract to make or authorize
to be made or contracted capital or periodic subsidies by the state to any city, town,  village, or public
corporation, payable only with moneys appropriated therefor from the general fund of the state; authorize
any city, town or village to make or contract to make such subsidies to any public corporation, payable only
with money locally appropriated therefore from the general or other fund available for current expenses of
such municipality; authorize the contracting of indebtedness for the purpose of purpose of providing moneys
out of which it may make or contract to make or authorize to be made or contracted loans by the state to any
city, town, village or public corporation; authorize any city, town or village to make or contract to make
loans to any public corporation; authorize any city, town or village to guarantee the principal of and interest
on, or only the interest on, indebtedness contracted by a public corporation; authorize and provide for loans
by the state and authorize loans by any city, town or village to or in aid of corporations regulated by law as
to rents, profits, dividends and disposition of their property or franchises and engaged in providing housing
facilities or nursing home accommodations; authorize any city, town or village to make loans to the owners
of existing multiple dwellings for the rehabilitation and improvement thereof for occupancy by persons of
low income as defined by law; grant or authorize tax exemptions in whole or in part, except that no such
exemption may be granted or authorized for a period of more than sixty years; authorize cooperation with
and the acceptance of aid from the United States; grant the power of eminent domain to any city, town or
village, to any public corporation regulated by law as to rents, profits, dividends and disposition of its
property or franchises and engaged in providing housing facilities.
   As used in this article, the term "public corporation" shall mean any corporate governmental agency
(except a county or municipal corporation) organized pursuant to law to accomplish any or all of the
purposes specified in this article. 

Amended November 2. 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 177 001.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 14, section 1
1. The lands of the state, now owned or hereafter acquired, constituting the forest preserve as now fixed by
law, shall be forever kept as wild forest lands. They shall not be leased, sold or exchanged, or be taken by
any corporation, public or private, nor shall the timber thereon be sold, removed or destroyed. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the state from constructing, completing and maintaining any highway
heretofore specifically authorized by constitutional amendment, nor from constructing and maintaining to
federal standards federal aid interstate highway route five hundred two from a point in the vicinity of the city
of Glens Falls, thence northerly to the vicinity of the villages of Lake George 
and  Warrensburg, the hamlets of South Horicon and Pottersville and thence northerly in a generally straight
line on the west side of Schroon Lake to the vicinity of the hamlet of Schroon, then continuing northerly to
the vicinity of Schroon Falls, Schroon River and North Hudson, and to tile east of Makomis Mountain, east
of the hamlet of New Russia, east of the village of  Elizabethtown  and continuing northerly in the vicinity of
the hamlet of Towers Forge, and cast of Poke-0-Moonshine Mountain and continuing northerly to the
vicinity of the village of Keeseville and the city of Plattsburgh, all of the aforesaid taking not to exceed a
total of three hundred acres of state forest preserve land, nor from constructing and maintaining not more
than twenty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide on the north, east and northwest slopes of Whiteface
Mountain in Essex county, nor from constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails
thirty, to eighty feet wide, together with appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of Belleayre Mountain in Ulster
and Delaware counties and not more than thirty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together with
appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of Gore, South and Pete Gay mountains in Warren county, nor from
relocating, reconstructing and maintaining a total of not more than fifty miles of existing state highways for
the purpose of eliminating the hazards of dangerous curves and grades, provided a total of not more than
four hundred acres of forest preserve land shall be used for such purpose and that no single relocated portion
of any highway shall exceed one mile in length. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may
convey to the village of Saranac Lake ten acres of forest preserve land adjacent to the boundaries of such
village for public use in providing for refuse disposal and in exchange therefore the village of Saranac Lake
shall convey to the state thirty acres of certain true forest land owned by such village on Roaring Brook in
the northern half of Lot 113, Township 11, Richards Survey. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the
state may convey to the town of Arietta twenty-eight acres of forest preserve land within such town for
public use in providing for the extension of the runway and landing strip of the Piseco airport and in
exchange therefor the town of Arietta shall convey to the state thirty acres of certain land owned by such
town in the town of Arietta.

 Amended November 21 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 178 001.0 008.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 8, section 1
1. No county, city, town, village or school district shall give or loan any money or property to or in aid of
any individual, or private corporation or association, or private undertaking, or become directly or indirectly
the owner of stock in, or bonds of, any private corporation or association; nor shall any county, city, town,
village or school district give or loan its credit to or in aid of any individual, or public or private corporation
or association, or private undertaking, except that two or more such units may join together pursuant to law
in providing any municipal facility, service, activity which each of such units has the power to provide
separately. Each such unit may be authorized by the legislature to contract joint or several indebtedness,
pledge its or their faith and credit for the payment of such indebtedness for such joint undertaking and levy
real estate or other authorized taxes or impose charges therefore subject to the provisions of this constitution
otherwise restricting the power of such units to contract indebtedness or to levy taxes on real estate. The
legislature shall have power to provide by law for the manner and the proportion in which indebtedness
arising out of such  joint undertakings shall be incurred by such units and shall have power to provide a
method by which such indebtedness shall be determined, allocated and apportioned among such units and
such indebtedness treated for purposes of exclusion from applicable constitutional limitations, provided that
in no event shall more than the total amount of indebtedness incurred for such joint undertaking be included
in ascertaining the power of all such participating units to incur indebtedness.  Such law may provide that
such determination, allocation and apportionment shall be conclusive if made or approved by the
comptroller.  This provision shall not prevent a county from contracting indebtedness for the purpose of
advancing to a town or school district, pursuant to law, the amount of unpaid taxes returned to it.
    Subject to the limitations on indebtedness and taxation applying to any county, city, town or village
nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent a county, city or town from making such provision for
the aid, care and support of the needy as may be authorized by law, nor prevent any such county, city or town
from providing for the care, support, maintenance and secular education of inmates of orphan is asy1ums,
homes for dependent children or correctional institutions and of children placed in family homes by
authorized agencies, whether under public or private control, or from providing health and welfare services
for all children, nor shall anything in this constitution contained prevent a county, city, town or village from
increasing the pension benefits payable to retired members of a police department or fire department or to
widows, dependent children or dependent parents of members or retired members of a police department or
fire department: or prevent the city of New York from increasing the pension benefits payable to widows,
dependent children or dependent parents of members or retired members of the relief and pension fund of
the department of street cleaning of the city of New York. Payments by counties, cities or towns to
charitable, eleemosynary, correctional and reformatory institutions and agencies, wholly or partly under
private control, for care, support and maintenance, may be authorized, but shall not be required by the
legislature. No such payments shall be made for any person cared for by any such institution or agency, nor
for a child placed in a family home, who is not received and retained therein pursuant to rules established by
the state board of social welfare or other state department having the power of inspection thereof. 

Amended November 2, 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 179 008.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1965 ***

Article 13, section 8
8. All elections of city officers, including supervisors, elected in any city or part of a city, and of county
officers elected in any county wholly included in a city, except to fill vacancies, shall be held on the Tuesday
succeeding the first Monday in November in an odd numbered year, and the term of every such officer shall
expire at the end of an odd-numbered year. This section shall not apply to elections of any judicial officer. 

New. Added November 2, 1965.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 180 001.0 002.0 0 NY 1938 1966 ***

Article 2, section 1
 l. Every citizen shall be entitled to vote at every election for all officers elected by the people and upon all
questions submitted to the vote of the people provided that such citizen is twenty-one years of age or over
and shall have been a resident of this state, and of the county, city, or village for three months next preceding
an election.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, after January first, one thousand nine hundred twenty-two, no
person shall become entitled to vote by attaining majority, by naturalization or otherwise, unless such person
is also able, except for physical disability, to read and write English. 

Amended November 8, 1966.


*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 181 009.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1966 ***

Article 1, section 9.
 9. 1. No law shall be passed abridging the rights of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the
government, or any department thereof; nor shall any divorce be granted otherwise than by due judicial
proceedings; except as hereinafter provided, no lottery or the sale of lottery tickets, pool-selling, book-
making, or any other kind of gambling, except lotteries operated by the state and the sale of lottery tickets in
connection therewith as may be authorized and prescribed by the legislature, the net proceeds of which shall
be applied exclusively to or in aid or support of education in this state as the legislature may prescribe, and
except pari-mutual betting on horse races as may be prescribed by the legislature and from which the state
shall derive a reasonable revenue for the support of government, shall hereafter be authorized or allowed
within this state; and the legislature shall pass appropriate laws to prevent offenses against any of the
provisions of this section.
     2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any city, town or village within the state may
by an approving vote of the majority of the qualified electors in such municipality voting on a proposition
there for submitted at a general or special election authorize, subject to state legislative supervision and
control, the conduct of specific games of chance, commonly known as bingo or lotto, in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card conforming numbers or symbols selected
at random. If authorized, such games shall be subject to the following restrictions, among others which may
be prescribed by the legislature: only bona fide religious, charitable or non-profit organizations of veterans,
volunteer firemen and similar non-profit organizations shall lie permitted to conduct such games; the entire
net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of such organizations; no
single prize shall exceed two hundred and fifty dollars; no series of prizes on any one occasion shall
aggregate more than one thousand dollars; no person except a bona fide member of any such organization
shall participate in the management or operation of such game; and no person shall receive any remuneration
for participating in the management or operation of any such game. The legislature shall pass appropriate
laws to effectuate the purposes of this subdivision, ensure that such games are rigidly regulated to prevent
commercialized gambling prevent participation by criminal and other undesirable elements and the diversion
of funds from the purposes authorized hereunder and establish a method by which a municipality which has
authorized such games may rescind or revoke such authorization. Unless permitted by the legislature, no
municipality shall have the power to pass local laws or ordinances relating to such games. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the legislature from passing laws more restrictive than any of the provisions of this
section. 

Amended November 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 182 005.0 002.0 0 NY 1938 1966 ***  

Article 2, section 5
5. Laws shall be made for ascertaining, by proper proofs, the citizens who shall be entitled to the right of
suffrage hereby established, and for the registration of voters; which registration shall be completed at least
ten days before each election. Such registration shall not be required for town and village elections except by
express provision of law.  In cities  and villages having five thousand inhabitants or more, voters shall be
registered upon personal application only; but voters
not residing in such cities or villages shall not be required to apply in person for registration at the first
meeting of the officers having charge of the registry of voters; however, voters who are in the actual military
service of the state of the  United States, in the army, navy, air force or any branch thereof, or in the coast
guard, or inmates of a veterans' bureau hospital and voters who are unable to appear personally for
registration because of illness or physical disability or because their duties, occupation or business require
them to be outside the counties of their residence or, in the case of residents of the city of New York, their
duties, occupation or business require them to be in a county outside such city; and a spouse, parent or child
of such a voter in the actual military service or of such an inmate or of such a voter unable to appear
personally for registration, accompanying or being with him or her, if a qualified voter and a resident of the
same election district, and if outside the county of such election district, shall not be required to register
personally.  The number of such inhabitants shall be determined according to the latest census or
enumeration, federal or state, showing the population of the city or village, except that the federal census
shall be controlling unless such state enumeration, if any, shall have been taken and returned two or more
years after the return of the preceding federal census. 

Amended November 8, 1966.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 183 025.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1966 ***

Article 6, section 25
 25. a. The compensation of a judge of the court of appeals, a justice of the supreme court, a judge of the
court of claims, a judge of the county court, a judge of the surrogate's court, a judge of the family court, a
judge of a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article, a judge of the
district court or of a retired judge or justice shall be established by law and shall not be diminished during the
term of office for which he was elected or appointed. Any judge or justice of a court abolished by section
thirty-five of this article, who pursuant to that section becomes a judge or justice of a court established or
continued by this article, shall receive without interruption or diminution for the remainder of the term for
which he was elected or appointed to the abolished court the compensation lie had been receiving upon the
effective date of this article together with any additional compensation that may be prescribed by law.
         
b.  Each judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, judge of the court of claims, judge of the
county court, judge of the surrogate's court, judge of the family court, judge of a court for the city of New
York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article and judge of the district court shall retire on the last
day of December in the year in which he reaches the age of seventy. Each such former judge of the court of
appeals and justice of the supreme court may thereafter perform the duties of a justice of the supreme court,
with power to hear and determine actions and proceedings, provided, however, that it shall be certificated in
the manner provided by law that the services of such judge or justice are necessary to expedite the business of
the court and that he is mentally and physically able and competent to perform the full duties of such office.
Any such certification shall be valid for a term of two years and may be extended as provided by law for
additional terms of two years. A retired judge or justice shall serve no longer than until the last day of
December in the year in which he    reaches the age of seventy-six. A retired judge or justice shall be subject
to assignment by the appellate division of the supreme court of the judicial department of his residence. Any
retired justice of the supreme court who had been designated to and served as a justice of any appellate
division immediately preceding his reaching the age of seventy shall be eligible for designation by the
governor as a temporary or additional justice of the appellate division. A retired judge or justice shall not be
counted in determining the number of justices in a judicial district for purposes of section six subdivision d of
this article.
         
c.  The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to any judge or justice who has not reached the age
of seventy-six and to whom it would otherwise have been applicable but for the fact that he reached the age
of seventy and retired before the effective date of this article.

Amended November 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 184 008.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1966 ***

Article 7, Section 8
8. 1. The money of the state shall not be given or loaned to or in aid of any private corporation or association,
or private  undertaking; nor shall the credit of the state be given or loaned to or in aid of any individual, or
public or private corporation or association, or private undertaking, but the foregoing provisions shall not
apply to any fund or property now held or which may hereafter be held by the state for educational, mental
health or mental retardation purposes.

2. Subject to the limitations on indebtedness and taxation, nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent
the legislature from providing for the aid, care and support of the needy directly or through subdivisions of
the state; or for the protection by insurance or otherwise, against the hazards of unemployment, sickness and
old age; or for the education and support of the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the physically handicapped, the
mentally ill, the emotionally disturbed, the mentally retarded or juvenile delinquents as it may deem proper;
or for health and welfare services for all children, either directly or through subdivisions of the state,
including school districts; or for the aid, care and support of neglected and dependent children and of the
needy sick, through agencies and institutions authorized by the state board of social welfare or other state
department having the power of inspection thereof, by payments made on a per capita basis directly or
through the subdivisions of the state; or for the increase in the amount of pensions of any member of a
retirement system of the state, or of a subdivision of the state; or for an increase in the amount of pensions of
any widow of a retired member of a teachers' retirement system of the state or of  a subdivision of the state to
whom payable as beneficiary under an optional settlement in connection with the pension of such member. 
The enumeration of legislative powers in this paragraph shall not be taken to diminish any power of the
legislature hitherto existing.

3.  Nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent the legislature from authorizing the loan of the money
of the state to a public corporation to be organized for the purpose of making loans to non-profit corporations
to finance the construction of new industrial or manufacturing plants in this state or the acquisition,
rehabilitation or improvement of former industrial or manufacturing plants in this state, including the
acquisition of real property therefor, and the use of such money by such public corporation for such purposes,
to improve employment opportunities in any area of the state, provided, however, that any loan by such
public corporation shall not exceed thirty per centum of the cost of any such project and the repayment of
which shall be secured by a mortgage thereon which shall not be a junior incumbrance thereon by more than
fifty per centum of such cost.

Amended November 8, 1966.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 185 007.0 017.0 0 NY 1938 1969 ***

Article 17, Section 7.
7. Notwithstanding  any other provision of this constitution, the legislature may authorize the state, a
municipality or a public corporation acting as an instrumentality of the state or municipality to lend its money
or credit to or in aid of any corporation or association, regulated by law as to its charges, profits, dividends,
and disposition of its property or franchises, for the purpose of providing such hospital or other facilities for
the prevention, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, disability, deformity or physical
condition, and for facilities incidental appointment thereto as may be prescribed by law. 

New. Added November 4, 1969.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 186 008.0 010.0 0 NY 1938 1969 ***

Article 10, section 8
8. Notwithstanding any provision of this or any other article of this constitution, the legislature may by law,
which shall take effect without submission to the people, make or authorize making the state liable for the
payment of the principle of and interest on bonds of a public corporation to be created pursuant to and for the
purposes specified in the last paragraph of section eight of article seven of this constitution, maturing in not to
exceed thirty years after their respective dates, and for the principle of and interest on notes of such
corporation issued in anticipation of such bonds, which notes and any renewals thereof shall mature within
seven years after the respective dates of such notes, provided that the aggregate principal amount of such
bonds with respect to which the state shall be so liable shall not at any one time exceed one hundred fifty
million dollars, excluding bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds.  

(New section added by amendment Number 4 approved by vote of the people November 7, 1961. 
Formerly duplicate  7 added by vote of the people November 7, 1961; remembered and amended by
vote of the people November 4, 1969.)

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 187 004.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1969 ***

Article 14, section 4.
 4. The policy of the state shall be to conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty and
encourage the development and improvement of its agricultural lands for the production of food and other
agricultural products. The legislature, in implementing this policy, shall include adequate provision for the
abatement of air and water pollution and of excessive and unnecessary noise, the protection of agricultural
lands, wetlands and shorelines, and the development and regulation of water resources. The legislature shall
further provide for the acquisition of lands and waters, including improvements thereon and any interest
therein, outside the forest preserve counties, and the dedication of properties so acquired or now owned,
which because of their natural, beauty, wilderness character, or geological, ecological or historical
significance, shall be preserved and administered for the use and enjoyment of the people. Properties so
dedicated shall constitute the state nature and historical preserve and they shall not be taken or otherwise
disposed of except by law enacted by two successive regular sessions of the legislature. 

New, added November 4, 1969.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 188 005.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1969 ***

Article 14, section 5
5. A violation of any of the provisions of this article may be restrained at the suit of the people or, with the
consent of the supreme court in appellate division, on notice to the attorney general at the suit of any citizen.
(New. Derived from former  7 of Art. 4. Adopted by Constitutional Convention of 1938 and approved by
vote of the people November S, 1938. Renumbered  5 by vote of the people November 4, 1969.)

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 189 005.A 003.0 1 NY 1938 1969 ***

Article 3, section 5-a.
5-a. For the purpose of apportioning senate and assembly districts pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this
article, the term "inhabitants, excluding aliens" shall mean the whole number of persons. 

New. Added November 4, 1969.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 190 008.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 7, Section 8
1. The money of the state shall not be given or loaned to or in aid of any private corporation or association, or
private  undertaking; nor shall the credit of the state be given or loaned to or in aid of any individual, or
public or private corporation or association, or private undertaking, but the foregoing provisions shall not
apply to any fund or property now held or which may hereafter be held by the state for educational, mental
health or mental retardation purposes.

2. Subject to the limitations on indebtedness and taxation, nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent
the legislature from providing for the aid, care and support of the needy directly or through subdivisions of
the state; or for the protection by insurance or otherwise, against the hazards of unemployment, sickness and
old age; or for the education and support of the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the physically handicapped, the
mentally ill, the emotionally disturbed, the mentally retarded or juvenile delinquents as it may deem proper;
or for health and welfare services for all children, either directly or through subdivisions of the state,
including school districts; or for the aid, care and support of neglected and dependent children and of the
needy sick, through agencies and institutions authorized by the state board of social welfare or other state
department having the power of inspection thereof, by payments made on a per capita basis directly or
through the subdivisions of the state; or for the increase in the amount of pensions of any member of a
retirement system of the state, or of a subdivision of the state; or for an increase in the amount of pensions of
any widow of a retired member of a teachers' retirement system of the state or of  a subdivision of the state to
whom payable as beneficiary under an optional settlement in connection with the pension of such member. 
The enumeration of legislative powers in this paragraph shall not be taken to diminish any power of the
legislature hitherto existing.

3.  Nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent the legislature from authorizing the loan of the money
of the state to a public corporation to be organized for the purpose of making loans to non-profit corporations
to finance the construction of new industrial or manufacturing plants in this state or the acquisition,
rehabilitation or improvement of former industrial or manufacturing plants, the construction of new buildings
to be used for research and development, and for the purchase of machinery and equipment related to such
new industrial or manufacturing plants and research and development buildings in this state, including the
acquisition of real property therefor, and the use of such money by such public corporation for such purposes,
to improve employment opportunities in any area of the state, provided, however, that any loan by such
public corporation shall not exceed forty per centum of the cost of any such project and the repayment of
which shall be secured by a mortgage thereon which shall not be a junior incumbrance thereon by more than
fifty per centum of such cost or by a security interest if personalty.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 191 005.0 008.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 8, section 5
5.  In ascertaining the power of a county, city, town or village to contract indebtedness, there shall be
excluded:
A. Certificates or other evidences of indebtedness (except serial bonds of an issue having a maximum
maturity of more than two years issued for purposes other than the financing of capital improvements and
contracted to be redeemed in one of the two fiscal years immediately succeeding the year of their issue, and
certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued in any fiscal year in anticipation of (a) the collection of
taxes on real estate for amounts theretofore actually levied and uncollected or to be levied in such year and
payable out of such taxes, (b) moneys receivable from the state which have theretofore been apportioned by
the state or which are to be so apportioned within one year after their issue and (c) the collection of any other
taxes due and payable or to become due and payable within one year or of other revenues to be received
within one year after their issue; excepting any such certificates or other evidences of indebtedness or
renewals thereof which are not retired within five years after their date of original issue.

B.  Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted to provide for the supply of water.

C.  Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted by any county, city, town or village for a public
improvement or part thereof, or service, owned or rendered by such county, city, town or village,  annually
proportionately to the extent that the same shall have yielded to such county, city, town or village net
revenue; provided, however, that such net revenue shall be twenty-five per centum or more of the amount
required in such year for the payment of the interest on, amortization of, or payment of, such indebtedness.
Such exclusion shall be granted only if the revenues of such public improvement or part thereof, or service,
are applied to and actually used for payment of all costs of operation, maintenance and repairs, and payment
of the amounts required in such year for interest on and amortization of or redemption of such indebtedness,
or such revenues are deposited in a special fund to be used solely for such payments. Any revenues remaining
after such payments are made may be used for any lawful purpose of such county, city, town or village,
respectively.  Net revenue shall be determined by deducting from gross revenues of the preceding year all
costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for such year, or the legislature may provide that net revenue shall
he determined by deducting from the average of the gross revenues of not to exceed five of the preceding
years during which the public improvement or part thereof, or service, has been in operation, the     average of
all costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for the same years.  A proportionate exclusion of indebtedness
contracted or proposed to be contracted also may be granted for the period from the date when such
indebtedness is first contracted or to be contracted for such public improvement or part thereof, or service,
through the first year of operation of such public improvement or part thereof, or service.  Such exclusion
shall be computed in the manner provided in this section on the basis of estimated net revenue which shall be
determined by deducting from the gross revenues estimated to be received during the first year of operation of
such public improvement or part thereof, or service, all estimated costs of operation, maintenance and repairs
for such year.  The amount of any such proportionate exclusion shall not exceed seventy-five per centum of
the amount which would be excluded if the computation were made on the basis of net revenue instead of
estimated net revenue.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms and
conditions under which the proportionate amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded shall be
determined and no proportionate amount of such indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with
such determination. The legislature may provide that the state comptroller shall make such determination or it
may confer appropriate jurisdiction on the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial departments
in which such counties, cities, towns or villages are located for the purpose of determining the proportionate
amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded.
The provisions of this paragraph C shall not affect or impair any  existing exclusions of indebtedness, or the
power to exclude indebtedness, granted by any other provision of this constitution.

D. Serial bonds, issued by any county, city, town or village which now maintains a pension or retirement
system or fund which is not on an actuarial reserve basis with current payments to the reserve adequate to
provide for all current accruing liabilities. Such bonds shall not exceed in the aggregate an amount sufficient
to provide for the payment of the liabilities of such system or fund, accrued on the date of issuing such bonds,
both on account of pensioners on the pension roll on that date and prospective pensions to dependents of such
pensioners and on account of prior service of active members of such system or fund on that date. Such bonds
or the proceeds thereof shall be deposited in such system or fund. Each such pension or retirement system or
fund there after shall be maintained on an actuarial reserve basis with current payments to the reserve
adequate to provide for all current accruing liabilities.
         
E.  Indebtedness contracted on or after January first, nineteen hundred sixty-two and prior to January first,
nineteen hundred eighty-three, for the construction or reconstruction of facilities for the conveyance,
treatment and disposal of sewage.  The legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms and
conditions under which the amount of any such indebtedness to be excluded shall be determined, and no such
indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with such determination.

Amended Nov. 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 192 013.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1972 ***

Article 13, section 13
(a) Except in counties in the city of New York and except as authorized in section one of article nine of this
constitution, sheriffs, clerks of counties, and registers in counties having registers, shall be chosen by the
electors of the respective counties once in every three years and whenever the occurring of vacancies shall
require.  Sheriffs shall hold no other office.  They may be required by law to renew their security, from time
to time; and in default of giving such new security, their offices shall be deemed vacant.  But the county shall
never be made responsible for the acts of the sheriff.  The governor may remove any elective sheriff, county
clerk, district attorney or register within the term for which he shall have been elected; but before so doing he
shall give to such officer a copy of the charges against him and an opportunity of being heard in his defense. 
In each county a district attorney shall be chosen by the electors once in every three or four years as the
legislature shall direct.  The clerk of each county in the city of New York shall be appointed, and be subject to
removal, by the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial department in which the county is
located.  In addition to his powers and duties as clerk of the supreme court, he shall have power to select,
draw, summon and empanel grand and petit jurors in the manner and under the conditions now or hereafter
prescribed by law, and shall have such other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by the city from time to
time by local law.

(b)  Any district attorney who shall fail faithfully to prosecute a person charged with the violation in his
county of any provision of this article which may come to his knowledge, shall be removed from office by the
governor, after due notice and an opportunity of being heard in his defense. The expenses which shall be
incurred by any county, in investigating and prosecuting any charge of bribery or attempting to bribe any
person holding office under the laws of this state, within such county, or of receiving bribes by any such
person in said county, shall be a charge against the state, and their payment by the state shall be  provided for
by law.

(c) The city of New York is hereby vested with power from time to time abolish by local law, as defined by
the legislature, the office of any county officer within the city other than judges, clerks of counties and district
attorneys, and to assign any or all functions of such officers to city officer, courts or clerks of counties, and to
prescribe the powers, duties, qualifications, number, mode of selection and removal terms of office and
compensation of the persons holding such offices and the employees therein, and to assign to city officers any
powers or duties of clerks of counties not assigned by this constitution.  The legislature shall not pass any law
affecting any such matters in relation to such offices within the city of New York except on message from the
governor declaring that an emergency exists and the concurrent action of two-thirds of the members of each
house, except that existing laws regarding each such office shall continue in force, and may be amended or
repealed by the legislature as heretofore, until the power herein granted to the city has been exercised with
respect to that office.  The provisions of article nine shall not prevent the legislature from passing general or
special laws prescribing or affecting powers and duties of such city officers or such courts or clerks to whom
or which functions of such county officers shall have been so assigned, in so far as such powers or duties
embrace subjects not relating to property, affairs or government of such city.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 193 006.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Art. 1, Section 6
6. No person shall be held to answer for a capital or otherwise infamous crime (except in cases of
impeachment, and in cases of militia when in actual service, and the land, air and naval forces in time of war,
or which this state may keep with the consent of congress in time of peace, and in cases of petit larceny,
under the regulation of the legislature), unless on indictment of a grand jury, except that a person held for the
action of a grand jury upon a charge for such an offense, other than one punishable by death or life
imprisonment, with the consent of the district attorney, may waive indictment by a grand jury and consent to
be prosecuted on an information filed by the district attorney; such waiver shall be evidenced by written
instrument signed by the defendant in open court in the presence of his counsel. In any trial in any court
whatever the party accused shall be allowed to appear and defend in person and with counsel as in civil
actions and shall be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation and  be confronted with the witnesses
against him. No person shall be subject to be twice put in jeopardy for the same offense; nor shall he be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, providing, that any public officer who, upon
being called before a grand jury to testify concerning the conduct of his present office or of any public office
held by him within five years prior to such grand jury call to testify, or the performance of his official duties
in any such present or prior offices, refuses to sign a waiver of immunity against subsequent criminal
prosecution, or to answer any relevant question concerning such matters before such grand jury, shall by
virtue of such refusal, be disqualified from holding any other public office or public employment for a period
of five years from the date of such refusal to sign a waiver of immunity against subsequent prosecution, or to
answer any relevant question concerning such matters before such grand jury, and shall be removed from his
present office by the appropriate authority or shall forfeit his present office at the suit of the attorney general.
   The power of grand juries to inquire into the wilful misconduct in office of public officers, and to find
indictments or to direct the filing of informations in connection with such inquiries, shall never be suspended
or impaired by law.
   No person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law. 

Amended November 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 194 005.0 017.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 17, Section 5
5. The legislature may provide for the maintenance and support of institutions for the detention of persons
charged with or convicted of crime and for systems of probation and parole of persons convicted of crime.
There shall be a state commission of correction, which shall visit and inspect, or cause to be visited and
inspected by members of its staff, all institutions used for the detention of sane adults charged with or
convicted of crime. 

Amended November 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 195 013.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 6, Section 13.
13. a. The family court of the state of New York is hereby established. It shall consist of at least one judge in
each county outside the city of New York and such number of additional judges for such counties as may be
provided by law. Within the city of New York it shall consist of such number of judges as may be provided
by law. The judges of the family court within the city of New York shall be residents of such city and shall be
appointed by the mayor of the city of New York for terms of ten years. The judges of the family court outside
the city of New York, shall be chosen by the electors of the counties wherein they reside for terms of ten
years.

b. The family court shall have jurisdiction over the following classes of actions and proceedings which shall
be originated in such family court in the manner provided by law: (1) the protection, treatment, correction and
commitment of those minors who are in need of the exercise of the authority of the court because of
circumstances of neglect, delinquency or dependency, as the legislature may determine; (2) the custody of
minors except for custody incidental to actions and proceedings for marital separation, divorce, annulment of
marriage and dissolution of marriage; (3) the adoption of persons; (4) the support of dependents except for
support incidental to actions and proceedings in this state for marital separation, divorce, annulment of
marriage or dissolution of marriage; (5) the establishment of paternity; (6) proceedings for conciliation of
spouses; and (7) as may be provided by law: the guardianship of the person of minors and, in conformity with
the provisions of section seven of this article, crimes and offenses by or against minors or between spouses or
between parent and child or between members of the same family or household. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to abridge the authority or jurisdiction of courts to appoint guardians in cases originating in
those courts.

c. The family court shall also have jurisdiction to determine, with the same powers possessed by the supreme
court, the following matters when referred to the family court from the supreme court: habeas corpus
proceedings for the determination of the custody of minors; and in actions and proceedings for marital
separation, divorce, annulment of marriage and dissolution of marriage, applications to fix temporary or
permanent support and custody, or applications to enforce judgments and orders of support and of custody, or
applications to modify judgments and orders of support and of custody which may be granted only upon the
showing to the family court that there has been a subsequent change of circumstances and that modification is
required.

Amended November 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 196 003.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 14, Section 3.
3. 1. Forest and wild life conservation are hereby declared to be policies of the state. For the purpose of
carrying out such policies the legislature may appropriate moneys for the acquisition by the state of land,
outside of the Adirondack and Catskill parks as now fixed by law, for the practice of forest or wild life
conservation. The prohibitions of section I of this article shall not apply to any lands heretofore or hereafter
acquired or dedicated for such purposes within the forest preserve counties but outside of the Adirondack and
Catskill parks as now fixed by law, except that such lands shall not be leased, sold or exchanged, or be taken
by any corporation, public or private.

2. As to any other lands of the state, now owned or hereafter acquired, constituting the forest preserve
referred to in section one of this article, but outside of the Adirondack and Catskill parks as now fixed by law,
and consisting in any case of not more than one hundred contiguous acres entirely separated from any other
portion of the forest preserve, the legislature may by appropriate legislation, notwithstanding the provisions
of section one of this article, authorize: (a) the dedication thereof for the practice of forest or wild life
conservation; or (b) the use thereof for public recreational or other state purposes or the sale, exchange or
other disposition thereof; provided, however, that all moneys derived from the sale or other disposition of any
of such lands shall be paid into a special fund of the treasury and be expended only for the acquisition of
additional lands for such forest preserve within either such Adirondack or Catskill park. 

Amended November 6, 1973.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 197 018.0 003.0 0 NY 1938 1973 ***

Article 3, Section 18.
18. The members of the legislature shall be empowered. upon the presentation to the temporary president of
the senate and the speaker of the assembly of a petition signed by two-thirds of the members elected to each
house of the legislature, to convene the legislature on extraordinary occasions to act upon the subjects
enumerated in such petition. 

New. Added November 4, 1975.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 198 003.0 004.0 0 NY 1938 1975 ***

3. The governor shall be commander-in-chief of the military and naval forces of the state. He shall have
power to convene the legislature, or the senate only, on extraordinary occasions. At extraordinary sessions
convened pursuant to the provisions of this section no subject shall be acted upon, except such as the
governor may recommend for consideration. He shall communicate by message to the legislature at every
session the condition of the state, and recommend such matters to it as he shall judge expedient. He shall
expedite all such measures as may be resolved upon by the legislature, and shall take care that the laws are
faithfully executed. He shall receive far his services an annual salary to be fixed by joint resolution of the
senate and  assembly, and there shall be provided for his use a suitable and furnished executive residence. 

Amended November 4, 1975.
         
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 199 009.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1975 ***

Article 1, section 9

1. No law shall be passed abridging the fights of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the
government, or any department thereof; nor shall any divorce be granted otherwise than by due judicial
proceedings; except as hereinafter provided, no lottery or the sale of lottery tickets, pool selling,
book-making, or any other kind of gambling, except lotteries operated by the state and the sale of lottery
tickets in connection therewith as may be authorized and prescribed by the legislature, the net proceeds of
which shall be applied exclusively to or in aid or support of education in this state as the legislature may
prescribe,  and except pari-mutual betting on horse races as may be  prescribed by the legislature and from
which the state shall derive a reasonable revenue for the support of government, shall hereafter be authorized
or allowed within this state; and the legislature shall pass appropriate laws to prevent offenses against any of
the provisions of this section.
         
2.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any city, town or village within the state may be
an approving vote of the majority of the qualified electors in such municipality voting on a proposition
therefor submitted at a general or special election authorize, subject to state legislative supervision and
control, the conduct of one or both of the following categories of games of chance commonly known as: (a)
bingo or lotto, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card
conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random: (b) games in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
a winning number or numbers, color or colors, or symbol or symbols determined by chance from among
those previously selected or played, whether determined as the result of the spinning of a wheel, a drawing or
otherwise by chance.  If authorized, such games shall be subject to the following restrictions, among others
which may be prescribed by the following restrictions, among others which may be prescribed by the
legislature: (1) only bona fide religious, charitable or non-profit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen
and similar non-profit organizations shall be permitted to conduct such games; (2) the entire net proceeds of
any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of such organizations; (3) no single prize shall
exceed two hundred and fifty dollars; (4) no series of prizes on any one occasion shall aggregate more than
one thousand dollars; (5) no person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in
the management or operation of such game; and (6) no person shall receive any remuneration for participating
in the management or operation of any such game.  The legislature shall pass appropriate laws to effectuate
the purposes of this subdivision, ensure that such games are rigidly regulated to prevent commercialized
gambling, prevent participation by criminal and other undesirable elements and the diversion of funds from
the purposes authorized hereunder and establish a method by which a municipality which has authorized such
games may rescind or revoke such authorization.  Unless permitted by the legislature, no municipality shall
have the power to pass local laws or ordinances relating to such games.  Nothing in this section shall prevent
the legislature from passing laws more restrictive than any of the provisions of this section.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 200 022.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1975 ***

Article 6, Section 22
22. a. Any judge or justice of any court in the unified court system may be censured, suspended or removed
for cause, including, but not limited to, misconduct in office, persistent failure to perform his duties, habitual
intemperance and conduct, on or off the bench, prejudicial to the administration of justice, or retired for
mental or physical disability preventing the proper performance of his judicial duties after due notice and
hearing as hereinafter provided.

b.  The court on the judiciary shall be composed of five justices of the appellate division from judicial
departments other than the judicial department in which the judge or justice who is before the court has been
elected, appointed or designated to sit. The chief judge of the court of appeals shall appoint the members of
the court and shall designate one member to preside or such appointment and designation shall be made by
the senior associate judge of the court of appeals or as the legislature may provide in the absence,  inability or
disqualification of the chief judge of the court of appeals.
         
c.  The affirmative concurrence of not less than three members of the court shall be necessary for removal,
retirement, suspension or censure and the court may disqualify a judge or justice removed from office from
again holding any public office of this state. Proceedings to remove or the removal of a judge or justice from
office shall not prevent his indictment and punishment according to law. A judge or justice retired for
disability in accordance with this section shall thereafter receive such compensation as may be provided by
law.

d.  The chief judge of the court of appeals may convene  the court on the judiciary upon his own motion and
shall convene the court upon written request by the governor or by a presiding justice of the appellate
division, or an appellate division or upon the recommendation of the commission on judicial conduct, as
hereinafter provided, or upon the  written request of a judge or justice, whose censure, suspension or
retirement has been recommended by the commission on judicial conduct, as hereinafter provided.

e.  After the court on the judiciary has been convened and charges of removal or retirement have been
preferred against a judge or justice, the presiding officer of the court on the judiciary shall, before a hearing
on charges of removal for cause commences, give written notice to the governor, the temporary president of
the senate and the speaker of the assemb1y of the name of the judge or justice against whom charges have
been preferred, the nature of the charges and the date set for hearing these charges,  which shall not be less
than sixty days after the giving of such notice. Immediately upon receipt of such notice,   the legislature shall
be deemed to be in session for the purpose of this proceeding. If any member of the legislature prefers the
same charges against the judge or justice concerned within thirty days after receipt of such notice and if such
charges are entertained by a majority vote of the assembly, proceedings before the court on the judiciary shall
be stayed pending the determination of the legislature which shall be exclusive and final. But a proceeding by
the court on the judiciary for the retirement of a judge or justice for mental or physical disability preventing
the proper performance of his judicial duties shall not be stayed.

f.  The court on the judiciary shall have power to designate the attorney for the commission on judicial
conduct to act as counsel to conduct the proceeding, to summon witnesses to appear and testify under oath
and to compel the production of books, papers, documents and records before such counsel in advance of the
trial and before the court upon the trial, to grant immunity from prosecution or punishment, as may be
provided by law when the court deems it necessary and proper in order to compel the giving of testimony
under oath and the production of books, papers, documents and records, and to make its own rules and
procedures for the investigation and trial.

g.  The court on the judiciary shall have such further powers and duties as may be provided by law.

h.  The judges or justices while exercising the powers of a court on the judiciary shall serve without
additional       compensation but the legislature shall provide moneys by appropriation to meet the expenses of
the court.

i.  A judge or justice may not exercise the powers of his office while charged with a felony or while a
proceeding for his removal or retirement by the court on the judiciary is pending. A judge or justice may not
exercise the powers of his office nor receive his judicial salary upon pleading guilty to or being found guilty
of a felony pending review of the conviction by a court of appellate jurisdiction.         

j.  An appeal may be taken by either the commission on judicial conduct or the respondent to the court of
appeals by permission of such court from a final determination of the court on the judiciary.

k.  There shall be a commission on judicial conduct, the organization and procedure of which shall be as the
legislature shall provide. The commission shall receive and investigate complaints of the public with respect
to the qualifications, conduct, or fitness to perform or the performance of the official duties of any judge or
justice of any court within the unified court system and may, on its own motion, initiate investigations with
respect to the qualifications, conduct, or fitness to perform or the performance of the official duties of any
such judge or justice. The commission may either recommend to the chief judge of the court of appeals the
convening of the court on the judiciary, for stated reasons, to hear and determine charges against a judge or
justice, or determine that a judge or justice be censured, suspended or retired, as provided by law. The
commission shall transmit any determination of censure, suspension or retirement to the chief judge of the
court of appeals who  shall give written notice of such determination to the judge or justice involved. Such
judge or justice may either accept the commission's determination or make written request to the chief judge,
within thirty days after receipt of such notice, for the convening of the court on the judiciary to hear and
determine the charges, in which event the court on the judiciary may impose whatever disciplinary measures
it may determine, including removal. If such judge or justice shall accept the commission's determination or
shall not request the convening of the court on the judiciary, he shall thereupon be censured, suspended or
retired by the commission in accordance with its findings. The jurisdiction of the commission on judicial
conduct and the court on the judiciary over any judge or justice with respect to whom a complaint has been
received or an investigation initiated shall continue notwithstanding the election, re-election, appointment or
reappointment of such judge or justice to any other judicial office.
          
l.  (1) The commission on judicial conduct shall consist of three persons appointed by the governor, one of
whom must be a lawyer admitted to practice in the state and two of whom shall not be lawyers, justices or
judges or retired justices or judges of the unified court system; one persons appointed by the president pro
tem of the senate; one person appointed by the minority leader of the senate; one person appointed by the
speaker of the assembly; one person appointed by the minority leader of the assembly; and two persons
appointed by the chief judge of the court of appeals, one, of whom must be a justice of the appellate division
of the supreme court and the other of whom must be a judge or justice of a court of record other than the
court of         appeals. None of the persons to be appointed by the legislative leaders shall be justices or judges
or retired justices or judges of the unified court system.
(2) The persons first appointed by the governor shall have respectively one, two and three year terms as he
shall designate. The persons first appointed by the chief judge of the court of appeals shall have respectively
three and four year terms as he shall designate. The person first appointed by the president pro tem of the
senate shall have a one year term. The person first appointed by the minority leader of the senate shall have a
two year term. The person first appointed by the speaker of the assembly shall have a four year term.  The
person first appointed by the minority leader of the assembly shall have a three year term. Each member of
the commission shall be appointed thereafter for a term of four years. Commission membership of the judge
or justice appointed by the chief judge shall terminate if such member ceases to hold the judicial position that
qualified him for such appointment. Such membership shall also terminate if a member attains a position that
would have rendered him ineligible for such membership at the time of his appointment.  A vacancy shall be
filled by the appointing power for the remainder of the term.
         
Amended November 4, 1975.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 201 002.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 2
2. a. The court of appeals is continued. It shall consist of the chief Judge and the six elected associate judges
now, in office, who shall hold their offices until the expiration of their respective terms, and their successors,
and such justices of the supreme court as may be designated for service in said court as hereinafter provided.
The official terms of the chief judge and the six associate judges shall be fourteen years. 
   Five members of the court shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of four shall be necessary to a
decision: but no more than seven judges shall sit in any case. In case of the temporary absence or inability to
act of any judge of the court of appeals, the court may designate any justice of the supreme court to serve as
associate judge of the court during such absence or inability to act. The court shall have power to appoint and
to remove its clerk. The powers and jurisdiction of the court shall not be suspended for want of appointment
when the number of judges is sufficient to constitute a quorum.

b. Whenever and as often as the court of appeals shall certify to the governor that the court is unable, by
reason of the accumulation of causes pending therein, to hear and dispose of the same with reasonable speed,
the governor shall designate such number of justices of the supreme court as may be so certified to be
necessary, but not more than four, to serve as associate judges of the court of appeals. The justices so
designated shall be relieved, while so serving, from their duties as justices of the supreme court, and shall
serve as associate judges of the court of appeals until the court shall certify that the need for the services of
any such justices no longer exists, whereupon they shall return to the supreme court. The governor may fill
vacancies among such designated judges. No such justices shall serve as associate judge of the court of
appeals except while holding the office of justice of the supreme court. The designation of a justice of the
supreme court as an associate judge of the court of appeals shall not be deemed to affect his existing office
any longer than until the expiration of his designation as such associate judge, nor to create a vacancy.

c. There shall be a commission on judicial nomination to evaluate the qualifications of candidates for
appointment to the court of appeals and to prepare a written report and recommend to the governor those
persons who by their character, temperament, professional aptitude and experience are well qualified to hold
such judicial office. The legislature shall provide by law for the organization and procedure of the judicial
nominating commission.

d. (1) The commission on judicial nomination shall consist of twelve members of whom four shall be
appointed by the governor, four by the chief judge of the court of appeals, and one each by the speaker of the
assembly, the temporary president of the senate, the minority leader of the senate, and the minority leader of
the assembly. Of the four members appointed by the governor, no more than two shall be enrolled in the same
political party, two shall be members of the bar of the state, and two shall not be members of the bar of the
state. Of the four members appointed by the chief judge of the court of appeals, no more than two shall be
enrolled in the same political party, two shall be members of the bar of the state, and two shall not be
members of the bar of the state. No member of the commission shall hold or have held any judicial office or
hold any elected public office for which he receives compensation during his period of service, except that
the governor and the chief judge may each appoint no more than one former judge or justice of the unified
court system to such commission. No member of the commission shall hold any office in any political party.
No member of the judicial nominating commission shall be eligible for appointment to judicial office in any
court of the state during the member's period of service or within one year thereafter.

(2) The members first appointed by the governor shall have respectively one, two, three and four year terms
as he shall designate. The members first appointed by the chief judge of the court of appeals shall have
respectively one, two, three and four year terms as he shall designate. The member first appointed by the
temporary president of the senate shall have a one year term. The member first appointed by the minority
leader of the senate shall have a two year term. The member first appointed by the speaker of the assembly
shall have a four year term. The member first appointed by the minority leader of the assembly shall have a
three year term. Each subsequent appointment shall be for a term of four years.
(3) The commission shall designate one of their number to serve as chairman.

(4) The commission shall consider the qualifications of candidates for appointment to the offices of judge and
chief judge of the court of appeals and, whenever a vacancy in those offices occurs, shall prepare a written
report and recommend to the governor persons who are well qualified for those judicial offices.

e. The governor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the senate, from among those recommended by
the judicial nominating commission, a person to fill the office of chief judge or associate judge, as the case
may be, whenever a vacancy occurs in the court of appeals; provided, however, that no person may be
appointed a judge of the court of appeals unless such person is a resident of the state and has been admitted to
the practice of law in this state for at least ten years. The governor shall transmit to the senate the written
report of the commission on judicial nomination relating to the nominee.

f. When a vacancy occurs in the office of chief or associate judge of the court of appeals and the senate is not
in session to give its advice and consent to an appointment to fill the vacancy, the governor shall fill the
vacancy by interim appointment upon the recommendation of a commission on judicial nomination as
provided in this section. An interim appointment shall continue until the senate shall pass upon the governor's
selection. If the senate confirms an appointment, the judge shall serve a term as provided in subdivision a of
this section commencing from the date of his interim appointment. If the senate rejects an appointment, a
vacancy in the office shall occur sixty days after such rejection. If an interim appointment to the court of
appeals be made from among the justices of the supreme court or the appellate divisions thereof, that
appointment shall not affect the justice's existing office, nor create a vacancy in the supreme court, or the
appellate division thereof, unless such appointment is confirmed by the senate and the appointee shall assume
such office. If an interim appointment of chief judge of the court of appeals be made from among the
associate judges, an interim appointment of associate judge shall be made in like manner; in such case, the
appointment as chief judge shall not affect the existing office of associate judge, unless such appointment as
chief judge is confirmed by the senate and the appointee shall assume such office.

g. The provisions of subdivisions c, d, e and f of this section shall not apply to temporary designations or
assignments of judges or justices. 

Subdivision a amended, subdivision c repealed and new subdivisions c through g added November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 202 036.A 006.0 1 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 36-a
36 a. The amendments to the provisions of sections two, four, seven, eight, eleven, twenty, twenty-two,
twenty-six, twenty-eight, twenty-nine and thirty of article six and to the provisions of section one of article
seven, as first proposed by a concurrent resolution passed by the legislature in the year nineteen hundred
seventy-six and entitled "Concurrent Resolution of the Senate and Assembly proposing amendments to
articles six and seven of the constitution, in relation to the manner of selecting judges of the court of appeals,
creation of a commission on judicial conduct and administration of the unified court system, providing for the
effectiveness of such amendments and the repeal of subdivision c of section two, subdivision b of section
seven, subdivision b of section eleven, section twenty-two and section twenty-eight of article six thereof
relating thereto", shall become a part of the constitution on the first day of January next after the approval and
ratification of the amendments proposed by such concurrent resolution by the people but the provisions
thereof shall not become operative and the repeal of subdivision c of section two, section twenty-two and
section twenty-eight shall not become effective until the first day of April next thereafter which date shall be
deemed the effective date of such amendments and the chief judge and the associate judges of the court of
appeals in office on such effective date shall hold their offices until the expiration of their respective terms.
Upon a vacancy in the office of any such judge, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in section
two of article six. 

New. Added November 8, 1977.

No section 36-b.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 203 004.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 4
4. a.  The state shall be divided into four judicial departments. The first department shall consist of the
counties within the first judicial district of the state. The second department shall consist of the counties
within the third, fourth and sixth judicial districts of the state. The third department shall consist of the
counties within the third, fourth and sixth judicial districts of the state. The fourth department shall consist of
the counties within the fifth, seventh and eighth judicial districts of the state. Each department shall be
bounded by the lines of judicial districts. Once every ten years the legislature may alter the boundaries of
judicial departments, but without changing the number thereof.

b. The appellate divisions of the supreme court are continued, and shall consist of seven justices of the
supreme court in each of the first and second departments, and five justices in each of the other departments.
In each appellate division, four justices shall constitute a quorum, and the concurrence of7three shall be
necessary to a decision. No more than five justices shall sit in any case.

c. The governor shall designate the presiding justice of each appellate division, who shall act as such during
his term of office and shall be a resident of the department. The other justices of the appellate divisions shall
be designated by the governor, from all the justices elected to the supreme court, for terms of five years or the
unexpired portions of their respective terms of office, if less than five years.

d. The justices heretofore designated shall continue to sit in the appellate divisions until the terms of their
respective designations shall expire. From time to time as the terms of the designations expire, or vacancies
occur, the governor shall make new designations. He may also, on request of any appellate division, make
temporary designations in case of the absence or inability to act of any justice in such appellate division, for
service only during such absence or inability to act.

e. In case any appellate division shall certify to the governor that one or more additional justices are needed
for the speedy disposition of the business before it, the governor may designate an additional justice or
additional justices; but when the need for such additional justice or justices shall no longer exist, the appellate
division shall so certify to the governor, and thereupon service under such designation or designations shall
cease.

f. A majority of the justices designated to sit in any appellate division shall at all times be residents of the
department.

g. Whenever the appellate division in any department shall be unable to dispose of its business within a
reasonable time, a majority of the presiding justices of the several departments, at a meeting called by the
presiding justice of the department in arrears, may transfer any pending appeals from such department to any
other department for hearing and determination.

h. A justice of the appellate division of the supreme court in any department may be temporarily designated
by the presiding justice of his department to the appellate division in another judicial department upon
agreement by the presiding justices of the appellate division of the departments concerned.

i. In the event that the disqualification, absence or inability to act of justices in any appellate division prevents
there being a quorum of justices qualified to hear an appeal, the justices qualified to hear the appeal may
transfer it to the appellate division in another department for hearing and determination. In the event that the
justices in any appellate division qualified to hear an appeal are equally divided, said justices may transfer the
appeal to the appellate division in another department for hearing and determination. Each appellate division
shall have power to appoint and remove its clerk.

j. No justice of the appellate division shall, within the department to which he may be designated to perform
the duties of an appellate justice, exercise any of the powers of a justice of the supreme court, other than those
of a justice out of court, and those pertaining to the appellate division, except that he may decide causes or
proceedings theretofore submitted, or hear  and decide motions submitted by consent of counsel, but any such
justice, when not actually engaged in performing the duties of such appellate justice in the department to
which he is designated, may hold any term of the supreme court and exercise any of the powers of a justice of
the supreme court in any judicial district in any other department of the state.

k. The appellate divisions of the supreme court shall have all the jurisdiction possessed by them on the
effective date of this article and such additional jurisdiction as may be prescribed by law, provided, however,
that the fight to appeal to the appellate divisions from a judgment or order which does not finally determine
an action or special proceeding may be limited or conditioned by law. 

Subdivision e amended November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 204 007.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***
                                        
Article 6, section 7
7. a. The supreme court shall have general original jurisdiction in law and equity and the appellate
jurisdiction herein provided. In the city of New York, it shall have exclusive jurisdiction over crimes
prosecuted by indictment, provided, however, that the legislature may grant to the citywide court of criminal
jurisdiction of the city of New York jurisdiction over misdemeanors prosecuted by indictment and to the
family court in the city of New York jurisdiction over crimes and offenses by or against minors or between
spouses or between parent and child or between members of the same family or household.

b. If the legislature shall create new classes of actions and proceedings, the supreme court shall have
jurisdiction over such classes of actions and proceedings, but the legislature may provide that another court or
other courts shall also have jurisdiction and that actions and proceedings of such classes may be originated in
such other court or courts. 

Subdivision b repealed and subdivision c relettered b November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 205 008.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 8
8. a. The appellate division of the supreme court in each judicial department may establish an appellate term
in and for such department or in and for a judicial district or districts or in and for a county or counties within
such department. Such an appellate term shall be composed of not less than three nor more than five justices
of the supreme court who shall be designated from time to time by the chief administrator of the courts with
the approval of the presiding justice of the appropriate appellate division, and who shall be residents of the
department or of the judicial district or districts as the case may be and the chief administrator of the courts
shall designate the place or places where such appellate terms shall be held.

b. Any such appellate term may be discontinued and reestablished as the appellate division of the supreme
court in each department shall determine from time to time and any designation to service therein may be
revoked by the chief administrator of the courts with the approval of the presiding justice of the appropriate
appellate division.

c. In each appellate term no more than three justices assigned thereto shall sit in any action or proceeding.
Two of such justices shall constitute a quorum and the concurrence of two shall be necessary to a decision.

d. If so directed by the appellate division of the supreme court establishing an appellate term, an appellate
term shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals now or hereafter authorized by law to be taken to
the supreme court or to the appellate division other than appeals from the supreme court, a surrogate's court,
the family court or appeals in criminal cases prosecuted by indictment or by * information as provided in
section six of article one.

e. As may be provided by law, an appellate term shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals from
the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New York. 

Subdivisions a, b and d amended November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 206 011.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 11
11. a. The county court shall have jurisdiction over the following classes of actions and proceedings which
shall be originated in such county court in the manner provided by law, except that actions and proceedings
within the jurisdiction of the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New York may,
as provided by law, be originated therein: actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and
proceedings for the recovery of chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens
and liens on personal property where the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property does not
exceed twenty-five thousand dollars exclusive of interest and costs; over all crimes and other violations of
law; over summary proceedings to recover possession of real property and to remove tenants therefrom; and
over such other actions and proceedings, not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be
provided by law.

b. The county court shall exercise such equity jurisdiction as may be provided by law and its jurisdiction to
enter judgment upon a counterclaim for the recovery of money only shall be unlimited.

c. The county court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all appeals arising in the county in the
following actions and proceedings: as of right, from a judgement or order of the district court or a town,
village or city court which finally determines an action or proceeding and, as may be provided by law, from a
judgment or order of any such court which does not finally determine an action or proceeding. The legislature
may provide, in accordance with the provisions of section eight of this article, that any or all of such appeals
be taken to an appellate term of the supreme court instead of the county court.

d. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section seven of this article. 

Subdivision b repealed and subdivisions c, d and e relettered b, c and d by vote of the people November 8,
1977; subdivision a amended November 8, 1983. 

[ This is the text for the 1983 amendment   I need the text of subdivision a, 1977]

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 207 020.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, Section 20
20. a. No person, other than one who holds such office at the effective date of this article, may assume the
office of judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, or judge of the court of claims unless he
has been admitted to practice law in this state at least ten years. No person, other than one who holds such
office at the effective date of this article, may assume the office of judge of the county court, surrogate's
court, family court, a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article,
district court or city court outside the city of New York unless he has been admitted to practice law in this
state at least five years or such greater number of years as the legislature may determine.
 
b.  A judge of the court of appeals, justice of the supreme court, judge of the court of claims, judge of a
county court, judge of the surrogate's court, judge of the family court or judge of a court for the city of New
York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article who is elected or appointed after the effective date
of this article may not:
(1)    hold any other public office or trust except an office in relation to the administration of the courts,
member of a constitutional convention or member of the armed forces of the United States or of the state of
New York in which latter event the legislature may enact such legislation as it deems appropriate to provide
for a temporary judge or justice to serve during the period of the absence of such judge or justice in the armed
forces;
(2)    be eligible to be a candidate for any public office other than judicial office or member of a constitutional
convention, unless he resigns his judicial office; in the event a judge or justice does not so resign his judicial
office within ten days after his acceptance of the nomination of such other office, his judicial office shall
become vacant and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided in this article;
(3)    hold any office or assume the duties or exercise the powers of any office of any political organization or
be a member of any governing or executive agency thereof;
(4)    engage in the practice of law, act as an arbitrator, referee or compensated mediator in any action or
proceeding or matter or engage in the conduct of any other profession or business which interferes with the
performance of his judicial duties. Judges and justices of the courts specified in this subdivision shall also be
subject to such rules of conduct as may be promulgated by the chief administrator of the courts with the
approval of the court of appeals.
            
c. Qualifications for and restrictions upon the judges of district, town, village or city courts outside the city of
New York, other than such qualifications and restrictions specifically set forth in subdivision a of this section,
shall be prescribed by the legislature, provided, however, that the legislature shall require a course of training
and education to be completed by justices of town and village courts selected after the effective date of this
article who have not been admitted to practice law in this state. Judges of such courts shall also be subject to
such rules of conduct not inconsistent with law as may be promulgated         by the chief administrator of the
courts with the approval of the court of appeals.

Amended November 8, 1977
                 
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 208 026.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 26
26. a. A justice of the supreme court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may
be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district or to the court of claims. A justice of the
supreme court in the city of New York may be temporarily assigned to the family court in the city of New
York or to the surrogate's court in any county within the city of New York when required to dispose of the
business of such court.

b. A judge of the court of claims may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district.

c. A judge of the county court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or
the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York or to a
court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

d. A judge of the surrogate's court in any county within the city of New York may perform the duties of his
office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence.

e. A judge of the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York may perform the duties of his
office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to a court for the city of
New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

f. A judge of the family court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or
the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any county outside of the city of New York or to a
court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

g. A judge of a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article may
perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme
court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to
the other court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

h.  A judge of the district court in any county may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county
and may be temporarily assigned to the county court in the judicial department of his residence or to a court
for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article or to the district court in any
county.

i.  Temporary assignments of all the foregoing judges or justices listed in this section shall be made by the
chief administrator of the courts in accordance with standards and administrative policies established
pursuant to section twenty-eight of this article.  

j.  The legislature may provide for temporary assignments within the county of residence or any adjoining
county, of judges of town, village, or city courts outside the city of New York.

k.  While temporarily assigned pursuant to the provisions of this section, any judge or justice shall have the
powers, duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which assigned.  After the expiration of
any temporary assignment, as provided in this section, the judge or justice assigned shall have all the powers,
duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which he was assigned with respect to matters
pending before him during the term of such temporary assignment.

Subdivision i amended November 8, 1977; 

Subdivision f amended November 8, 1983   get text of sub. F for 1977

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 209 028.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 28
28. a. The chief judge of the court of appeals shall be the chief Judge of the state of New York and shall be
the chief judicial officer of the unified court system. There shall be an administrative board of the courts
which shall consist of the chief judge of the court of appeals as chairman and the presiding justice of the
appellate division of the supreme court of each judicial department. The chief judge shall, with the advice and
consent of the administrative board of the courts, appoint a chief administrator of the courts who shall serve
at his pleasure.

b. The chief administrator, on behalf of the chief judge, shall supervise the administration and operation of
the unified court system. In the exercise of such responsibility, the chief administrator of the courts shall have
such powers and duties as may be delegated to him by the chief judge and such additional powers and duties
as may be provided by law.

c. The chief judge, after consultation with the administrative board, shall establish standards and
administrative policies for general application throughout. the state, which shall be submitted by the chief
judge to the court of appeals, together with the recommendations, if any, of the administrative board. Such
standards and administrative policies shall be promulgated after approval by the court of appeals. 

Section 28 repealed and new section 28 added November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 210 029.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 29
29. a. The legislature shall provide for the allocation of the cost of operating and maintaining the court of
appeals, the appellate division of the supreme court in each judicial department, the supreme court, the court
of claims, the county court, the surrogate's court, the family court, the courts for the city of New York
established pursuant to section fifteen of this article and the district court, among the state, the counties, the
city of New York and other political subdivisions.

b. The legislature shall provide for the submission of the itemized estimates of the annual financial needs of
the courts referred to in subdivision a of this section to the chief administrator of the courts to be forwarded to
the appropriating bodies with recommendations and comment.

c. Insofar as the expense of the courts is borne by the state or paid by the state in the first instance, the final
determination of the itemized estimates of the annual financial needs of the courts shall be made by the
legislature and the governor in accordance with articles four and seven of this constitution.

d. Insofar as the expense of the courts is not paid by the state in the first instance and is borne by counties, the
city of New York or other political subdivisions, the final determination of the itemized estimates of the
annual financial needs of the courts shall be made by the appropriate governing bodies of such counties, the
city of New York or other political subdivisions. 

Subdivision b amended November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 211 030.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 30
30. The legislature shall have the same power to alter and regulate the jurisdiction and proceedings in law and
in equity that it has heretofore exercised. The legislature may, on such terms as it shall provide and subject to
subsequent modification, delegate, in whole or in part, to a court, including the appellate division of the
supreme court, or to the chief administrator of the courts, any power possessed by the legislature to regulate
practice and procedure in the courts. The chief administrator of the courts shall exercise any such power
delegated to him with the advice and consent of the administrative board of the courts.  Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the adoption of regulations by individual courts consistent with the general practice
and procedure as provided by statute or general rules. (Amended by vote of the people November 8, 1977.)

which date shall be deemed the effective date of such amendments and the chief judge and the associate
judges of the court of appeals in office on such effective date shall hold their offices until the expiration of
their respective terms. Upon a vacancy in the office of any such judge, such vacancy shall be filled in the
manner provided in section two of article six. 

New. Added November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***

ARTICLE VII

*** MSTART 212 001.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 7, section 1
1. For the preparation of the budget, the head of each department of state government. except the legislature
and judiciary, shall furnish the governor such estimates and information in such form and at such times as he
may require, copies of which shall forthwith be furnished to the appropriate committees of the legislature.
The governor shall hold hearings thereon at which he may require the attendance of heads of departments and
their subordinates. Designated representatives of such committees shall be entitled to attend the hearings
thereon and to make inquiry concerning any part thereof.
   Itemized estimates of the financial needs of the legislature, certified by the presiding officer of each house,
and of the judiciary, approved by the court of appeals and certified by the chief judge of the court of appeals,
shall be transmitted to the governor not later than the first day of December in each year for inclusion in the
budget without revision but with such recommendations as he may deem proper. Copies of the itemized
estimates of the financial needs of the judiciary also shall forthwith be transmitted to the appropriate
committees of the legislature. 

Amended November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 213 022.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 6, section 22
22. a. There shall be a commission on judicial conduct. The commission on judicial conduct shall receive,
initiate, investigate and hear complaints with respect to the conduct, qualifications, fitness to perform or
performance of official duties of any judge or justice of the unified court system, in the manner provided by
law; and, in accordance with subdivision d of this section, may determine that a judge or justice be
admonished, censured or removed from office for cause, including, but not limited to, misconduct in office,
persistent failure to perform his duties, habitual intemperance, and conduct, on or off the bench, prejudicial to
the administration of justice, or that a judge or justice be retired for mental or physical disability preventing
the proper performance of his judicial duties. The commission shall transmit any such determination to the
chief judge of the court of appeals who shall cause written notice of such determination to be given to the
judge or justice involved. Such judge or justice may either accept the commission's determination or make
written request to the chief judge, within thirty days after receipt of such notice, for a review of such
determination by the court of appeals.

b. (1) The commission on judicial conduct shall consist of eleven members, of whom four shall be appointed
by the governor, one by the temporary president of the senate, one by the minority leader of the senate, one by
the speaker of the assembly, one by the minority leader of the assembly and three by the chief judge of the
court of appeals. Of the members appointed by the governor one person shall be a member of the bar of the
state but not a judge or justice, two shall not be members of the bar, justices or judges or retired justices or
judges of the unified court system, and one shall be a judge or justice of the unified court system. Of the
members appointed by the chief judge one person shall be a justice of the appellate division of the supreme
court and two shall be judges or justices of a court or courts other than the court of appeals or appellate
divisions. None of the persons to be appointed by the legislative leaders shall be justices or judges or retired
justices or judges.

(2) The persons first appointed by the governor shall have respectively one, two, three, and four year terms as
he shall designate. The persons first appointed by the chief judge of the court of appeals shall have
respectively two, three, and four year terms as he shall designate. The person first appointed by the temporary
president of the senate shall have a one year term. The person first appointed by the minority leader of the
senate shall have a two year term. The person first appointed by the speaker of the assembly shall have a four
year term. The person first appointed by the minority leader of the assembly shall have a three year term.
Each member of the commission shall be appointed thereafter for a term of four years. Commission
membership of a judge or justice appointed by the governor or the chief judge shall terminate if such member
ceases to hold the judicial position which qualified him for such appointment. Membership shall also
terminate if a member attains a position which would have rendered him ineligible for appointment at the
time of his appointment. A vacancy shall be filled by the appointing officer for the remainder of the term. 

c. The organization and procedure of the commission on judicial conduct shall be as provided by law. The
commission on judicial conduct may establish its own rules and procedures not inconsistent with law. Unless
the legislature shall provide otherwise, the commission shall be empowered to designate one of its members
or any other person as a referee to hear and report concerning any matter before the commission.

d. In reviewing a determination of the commission on judicial conduct, the court of appeals may admonish,
censure, remove or retire, for the reasons set forth in subdivision a of this section, any judge of the unified
court system. In reviewing a determination of the commission on judicial conduct, the court of appeals shall
review the commission's findings of fact and conclusions of law on the record of the proceedings upon which
the commission's determination was based. The court of appeals may impose a less or more severe sanction
prescribed by this section than the one determined by the commission, or impose no sanction.

e.  The court of appeals may suspend a judge or justice from exercising the powers of his office while there is
pending a determination by the commission on judicial conduct for his removal or retirement, or while he is
charged in this state with a felony by an indictment or an information filed pursuant to section six of article
one. The suspension shall continue upon conviction and, if the conviction becomes final, he shall be removed
from office. The suspension shall be terminated upon reversal of the conviction and dismissal of the
accusatory instrument.  Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent the commission on judicial conduct from
determining that a judge or Justice be admonished, censured, removed, or retired pursuant to subdivision a of
this section.

f. Upon the recommendation of the commission on judicial conduct or on its own motion, the court of
appeals may suspend a judge or justice from office when he is charged with a crime punishable as a felony
under the laws of this state, or any other crime which involves moral turpitude. The suspension shall continue
upon conviction and, if the conviction becomes final, he shall be removed from office. The suspension shall
be terminated upon reversal of the conviction and dismissal of the accusatory instrument.  Nothing in this
subdivision shall prevent the commission on judicial conduct from determining that a judge or justice be
admonished, censured, removed, or retired pursuant to subdivision a of this section.

g. A judge or justice who is suspended from office by the court of appeals shall receive his judicial salary
during such period of suspension, unless the court directs otherwise. If the court has so directed and such
suspension is thereafter terminated, the court may direct that he shall be paid his salary for such period of
suspension.

h. A judge or justice retired by the court of appeals shall be considered to have retired voluntarily. A judge or
justice removed by the court of appeals shall be ineligible to hold other judicial office.

i. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the legislature may provide by law for review of
determinations of the commission on judicial conduct with respect to justices of town and village courts by an
appellate division of the supreme court. In such event, all references in this section to the court of appeals and
the chief judge thereof shall be deemed references to an appellate division and the presiding justice thereof,
respectively.

j. If a court on the judiciary shall have been convened before the effective date of this section and the
proceeding shall not be concluded by that date, the court on the judiciary shall have continuing jurisdiction
beyond the effective date of this section to conclude the proceeding. All matters pending before the former
commission on judicial conduct on the effective date of this section shall be disposed of in such manner as
shall be provided by law. 

Section 22 repealed and new section 22 added November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 214 008.0 007.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 7, section 8
8. 1. The money of the state shall not be given or loaned to or in aid of any private corporation or association,
or private undertaking; nor shall the credit of the state be given or loaned to or in aid of any individual, or
public, or private corporation or association, or private undertaking, but the foregoing provisions shall not
apply to any fund or property now held or which may hereafter be held by the state for educational, mental
health or mental retardation purposes.

2. Subject to the limitations on indebtedness and taxation, in this constitution contained shall prevent the
legislature from providing for the aid, care and support of the needy directly or through subdivisions of the
state; or for the protection by insurance or otherwise, against the hazards of unemployment, sickness and old
age; or for the education and support of the blind, the deaf, the dumb, the physically handicapped, the
mentally ill, the emotionally disturbed, the mentally retarded or juvenile delinquents as it may deem proper;
or for health and welfare services for all children, either directly or through subdivisions of the state,
including school districts; or for the aid, care and support of neglected and dependent children and of the
needy sick, through agencies and institutions authorized by the state board of social welfare or other state
department having the power of inspection thereof, by payments made on a per capita basis directly or
through the subdivisions of the state; or for the increase in the amount of pensions of any member of a
retirement system of the state, or of a subdivision of the state; or for an increase in the amount of pension
benefits of any widow or widower of a retired member of a retirement system of the state or of a subdivision
of the state to whom payable as beneficiary under an optional settlement in connection with the pension of
such member. The enumeration of legislative powers in this paragraph shall not be taken to diminish any
power of the legislature hitherto existing.

3. Nothing in this constitution contained shall prevent the legislature from authorizing the loan of the money
of the state to a public corporation to be organized for the purpose of making loans to nonprofit corporations
or for the purpose of guaranteeing loans made by banking organizations, as that term shall be defined by the
legislature, to finance the construction of new industrial or manufacturing plants, the construction of new
buildings to be used for research and development, the construction of other eligible business facilities, and
for the purchase of machinery and equipment related to such new industrial or manufacturing plants, research
and development buildings, and other eligible business facilities in this state or the acquisition, rehabilitation
or improvement of former or existing industrial or manufacturing plants, buildings to be used for research and
development, other eligible business facilities, and machinery and equipment in this state, including the
acquisition of real property therefor, and the use of such money by such public corporation for such purposes,
to improve employment opportunities in any area of the state, provided, however, that any such plants,
buildings or facilities or machinery and equipment therefor shall not be (i) primarily used in making retail
sales of goods or services to customers who personally visit such facilities to obtain such goods or services or
(ii) used primarily as a hotel, apartment house or other place of business which furnishes dwelling space or
accommodations to either residents or transients, and provided further that any loan by such public
corporation shall not exceed forty per centum of the cost of any such project and the repayment of which shall
be secured by a mortgage thereon which shall not be a junior incumbrance thereon by more than fifty per
centum of such cost or by a security interest if personalty, and that the amount of any guarantee of a loan
made by a banking organization shall not exceed eighty per centum of the cost of any such project. 

Subdivision 2 amended November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 215 003.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1977 ***

Article 13, section 3
3. The legislature shall provide for filling vacancies in office, and in case of elective officers, no person
appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold his office by virtue of such appointment longer than the commencement
of the political year next succeeding the first annual election after the happening of the vacancy; provided,
however, that  contained in this article shall prohibit the filling of vacancies on boards of education, including
boards of education of community districts in the city school district of the city of New York, by appointment
until the next regular school district election, whether or not such appointment shall extend beyond the thirty-
first day of December in any year. 

Formerly  8, renumbered  3 without change by amendment approved November 6, 1962; former  3
repealed by same amendment. Amended again November 8, 1977.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 216 001.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1979 ***

this is the text of 1983, not 1977!!!!!!!!! I need '77 ??????

Article 14, section 1

1. The lands of the state, now owned or hereafter acquired, constituting the forest preserve as now fixed by
law, shall be forever kept as wild forest lands. They shall not be leased, sold or exchanged, or be taken by any
corporation, public or private, nor shall the timber thereon be sold, removed or destroyed. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the state from constructing, completing and maintaining any highway heretofore
specifically authorized by constitutional amendment, nor from constructing and maintaining to federal
standards federal aid interstate highway route five hundred two from a point in the vicinity of the city of
Glens Falls, thence northerly to the vicinity of the villages of Lake George and  Warrensburg, the hamlets of
South Horicon and Pottersville and thence northerly in a generally straight line on the west side of Schroon
Lake to the vicinity of the hamlet of Schroon, then continuing northerly to the vicinity of Schroon Falls,
Schroon River and North Hudson, and to tile east of Makomis Mountain, east of the hamlet of New Russia,
east of the village of  Elizabethtown  and continuing northerly in the vicinity of the hamlet of Towers Forge,
and cast of Poke-0-Moonshine Mountain and continuing northerly to the vicinity of the village of Keeseville
and the city of Plattsburgh, all of the aforesaid taking not to exceed a total of three hundred acres of state
forest preserve land, nor from constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails thirty to
eighty feet wide on the north, east and northwest slopes of Whiteface Mountain in Essex county, nor from
constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails thirty, to eighty feet wide, together with
appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of Belleayre Mountain in Ulster and Delaware counties and not more
than thirty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together with appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of
Gore, South and Pete Gay mountains in Warren county, nor from relocating, reconstructing and maintaining a
total of not more than fifty miles of existing state highways for the purpose of eliminating the hazards of
dangerous curves and grades, provided a total of not more than four hundred acres of forest preserve land
shall be used for such purpose and that no single relocated portion of any highway shall exceed one mile in
length. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may convey to the village of Saranac Lake ten
acres of forest preserve land adjacent to the boundaries of such village for public use in providing for refuse
disposal and in exchange therefore the village of Saranac Lake shall convey to the state thirty acres of certain
true forest land owned by such village on Roaring Brook in the northern half of Lot 113, Township 11,
Richards Survey. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may convey to the town of Arietta
twenty-eight acres of forest preserve land within such town for public use in providing for the extension of
the runway and landing strip of the Piseco airport and in exchange therefor the town of Arietta shall convey to
the state thirty acres of certain land owned by such town in the town of Arietta.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions and subject to legislative approval of the tracts to be exchanged prior to the actual
transfer of title, the state, in order to consolidate its land holdings for better management, may convey to
International Paper company approximately eight thousand five hundred acres of forest preserve land located
in townships two and three of Totten and Crossfield's Purchase and township nine of the Moose River Tract,
Hamilton county, and in exchange therefore International Paper Company shall convey to the state for
incorporation into the forest preserve approximately the same number of acres of land located within such
townships and such County on condition that the legislature shall determine that the lands to be received by
the state are at least equal in value to the lands to be conveyed by the state.

Amended November 6, 1979
 
*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 217 008.0 010.0 0 NY 1938 1981 ***

Article 10, section 8
8. Notwithstanding any provision of this or any other article of this constitution, the legislature may by law,
which shall take effect without submission to the people, make or authorize making the state liable for the
payment of the principal of and interest on bonds of a public corporation to be created pursuant to and for the
purposes specified in the last paragraph of section eight of article seven of this constitution, maturing in not to
exceed thirty years after their respective dates, and for the principal of and interest on notes of such
corporation issued in anticipation of such bonds, which notes and any renewals thereof shall mature within
seven years after the respective dates of such notes, provided that the aggregate principal amount of such
bonds with respect to which the state shall be so liable shall not at any one time exceed three hundred million
dollars, excluding bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds. 

Amended November 3, 1981.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 218 005.0 008.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 8, section 5
5. In ascertaining the power of a county, city, town or village to contract indebtedness, there shall be
excluded:

A. Certificates or other evidences of indebtedness (except serial bonds of an issue having a maximum
maturity of more than two years) issued for purposes other than the financing of capital improvements and
contracted to be redeemed in one of the two fiscal years immediately succeeding the year of their issue, and
certificates or other evidences of indebtedness any fiscal year in anticipation of  (a) the collection of taxes on
real estate for amounts theretofore actually levied and uncollected or to be levied in such year and payable out
of such taxes, (b) moneys receivable from the state which have theretofore been apportioned by the state or
which are to be so apportioned within one year after their issue and (c) the collection of any other taxes due
and payable or to become due and payable within one year or of other revenues to be received within one year
after their issue; excepting any such certificates or other evidences of indebtedness or renewals thereof which
are not retired within five years after their date of original issue.

B. Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted to provide for the supply of water.

C. Indebtedness heretofore or hereafter contracted by any county, city, town or village for a public
improvement or part thereof, or service, owned or rendered by such county, city, town or village, annually
proportionately to the extent that the same shall have yielded to such county, city, town or village net
revenue; provided, however, that such net revenue shall be twenty-five per centum or more of the amount
required in such year for the payment of the interest on, amortization of, or payment of, such indebtedness.
Such exclusion shall be granted only if the revenues of such public improvement or part thereof, or service,
are applied to and actually used for payment of all costs of operation, maintenance and repairs, and payment
of the amounts required in such year for interest on and amortization of or redemption of such indebtedness,
or such revenues are deposited in a special fund to be used solely for such payments. Any revenues remaining
after such payments are made may be used for any lawful purpose of such county, city, town or village,
respectively.
   Net revenue shall be determined by deducting from gross revenues of the preceding year all costs of
operation, maintenance and repairs for such year, or the legislature may provide that net revenue shall be
determined by deducting from the average of the gross revenues of not to exceed five of the preceding years
during which the public improvement or part thereof, or service, has been in operation, the average of all
costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for the same years.
   A proportionate exclusion of indebtedness contracted or proposed to be contracted also may be granted for
the period from the date when such indebtedness is first contracted or to be contracted for such public
improvement or part thereof, or service, through the first year of operation of such public improvement or
part thereof, or service. Such exclusion shall be computed in the manner provided in this section on the basis
of estimated net revenue which shall be determined by deducting from the gross revenues estimated to be
received during the first year of operation of such public improvement or part thereof, or service, all
estimated costs of operation, maintenance and repairs for such year. The amount of any such proportionate
exclusion shall not exceed seventy-five per centum of the amount which would be excluded if the
computation were made on the basis of net revenue instead of estimated net revenue.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms and
conditions under which the proportionate amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded shall be
determined and no proportionate amount of such indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with
such determination. The legislature may provide that the state comptroller shall make such determination or it
may confer appropriate jurisdiction on the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial departments
in which such counties, cities, towns or villages are located for the purpose of determining the proportionate
amount of any such indebtedness to be so excluded.
   The provisions of this paragraph C shall not affect or impair any existing exclusions of indebtedness, or the
power to exclude indebtedness, granted by any other provision of this constitution.

D. Serial bonds, issued by any county, city, town or village which now maintains a pension or retirement
system or fund which is not on an actuarial reserve basis with current payments to the reserve adequate to
provide for all current accruing liabilities. Such bonds shall not exceed in the aggregate an amount sufficient
to provide for the payment of the liabilities of such system or fund, accrued on the date of issuing such bonds,
both on account of pensioners on the pension roll on that date and prospective pensions to dependents of such
pensioners and on account of prior service of active members of such system or fund on that date. Such bonds
or the proceeds thereof shall be deposited in such system or fund. Each such pension or retirement system or
fund thereafter shall be maintained on an actuarial reserve basis with current payments to the reserve
adequate to provide for all current accruing liabilities.

E. Indebtedness contracted on or after January first, nineteen hundred sixty-two and prior to January first,
nineteen hundred ninety-four, for the construction or reconstruction of facilities for the conveyance, treatment
and disposal of sewage. The legislature shall prescribe the method by which and the terms and conditions
under which the amount of any such indebtedness to be excluded shall be determined, and no such
indebtedness shall be excluded except in accordance with such determination. 

Amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 219 003.0 010.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 10, section 3
3. The legislature shall, by general law, conform all charters of savings banks, savings and loan associations,
or institutions for savings, to a uniformity of powers, rights and liabilities, and all charters hereafter granted
for such corporations shall be made to conform to such general law, and to such amendments as may be made
thereto. The legislature shall have no power to pass any act granting any special charter for banking purposes;
but corporations or associations may be formed for such purposes under general laws. 

Amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 220 026.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 6, section 26
26. a. A justice of the supreme court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may
be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district or to the court of claims. A justice of the
supreme court in the city of New York may be temporarily assigned to the family court in the city of New
York or to the surrogate's court in any county within the city of New York when required to dispose of the
business of such court.

b. A judge of the court of claims may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in any judicial district.

c. A judge of the county court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or
the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York or to a
court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

d. A judge of the surrogate's  court in any county within the city of New York may perform the duties of his
office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence.

e. A judge of the surrogate's court in any county outside the city of New York may perform the duties of his
office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial
department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to a court for the city of
New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

f. A judge of the family court may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be
temporarily assigned to the supreme court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or
the family court in any county or to the surrogate's court in any county outside of the city of New York or to a
court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.

g. A judge of a court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article may
perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county and may be temporarily assigned to the supreme
court in the judicial department of his residence or to the county court or the family court in any county or to
the other court for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article.  . .

h. A judge of the district court in any county may perform the duties of his office or hold court in any county
and may be temporarily assigned to the county court in the Judicial department of his residence or to a court
for the city of New York established pursuant to section fifteen of this article or to the district court in any
county.

i. Temporary assignments of all the foregoing judges or justices listed in this section shall be made by the
chief administrator of the courts in accordance with standards and administrative policies established
pursuant to section twenty-eight of this article.

j. The legislature may provide for temporary assignments within the county of residence or any adjoining
county, of judges of town, village or city courts outside the city of New York.

k. While temporarily assigned pursuant to the provisions of this section, any judge or justice shall have the
powers, duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which assigned. After the expiration of any
temporary assignment, as provided in this section, the judge or justice assigned shall have all the powers,
duties and jurisdiction of a judge or justice of the court to which he was assigned with respect to matters
pending before him during the term of such temporary assignment. 

Subdivision f amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***


*** MSTART 221 001.0 014.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 14, section 1
1. The lands of the state, now owned or hereafter acquired, constituting the forest preserve as now fixed by
law, shall be forever kept as wild forest lands. They shall not be leased, sold or exchanged, or be taken by any
corporation, public or private, nor shall the timber thereon be sold, removed or destroyed.  Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the state from constructing, completing and maintaining any highway heretofore
specifically authorized by constitutional amendment, nor from constructing and maintaining to federal
standards federal aid interstate highway route five hundred two from a point in the vicinity of the city of
Glens Falls, thence northerly to the vicinity of the villages of Lake George and Warrensburg, the hamlets of
South Horicon and Pottersville and thence northerly in a generally straight line on the west side of Schroon
Lake to the vicinity of the hamlet of Schroon, then continuing northerly to the vicinity of Schroon Falls,
Schroon River and North Hudson, and to the east of Makomis Mountain, east of the hamlet of New Russia,
east of the village of Elizabethtown and continuing northerly in the vicinity of the hamlet of Towers Forge,
and east of Poke-O-Moonshine Mountain and continuing northerly to the vicinity of the village of Keeseville
and the city of Plattsburgh, all of the aforesaid taking not to exceed a total of three hundred acres of state
forest preserve land, nor from constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails thirty to
eighty feet wide on the north, east and northwest slopes of Whiteface Mountain in Essex county, nor from
constructing and maintaining not more than twenty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together with
appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of  Belleayre Mountain in Ulster and Delaware counties and not more
than thirty miles of ski trails thirty to eighty feet wide, together with appurtenances thereto, on the slopes of
Gore, South and Pete Gay mountains in Warren county, nor from relocating, reconstructing and maintaining a
total of not more than fifty miles of existing state highways for the purpose of eliminating the hazards of
dangerous curves and grades, provided a total of no more than four hundred acres of forest preserve land shall
be used for such purpose and that no single relocated portion of any highway shall exceed one mile in length.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may convey to the village of Saranac Lake ten acres of
forest preserve land adjacent to the boundaries of such village for public use in providing for refuse disposal
and in exchange therefore the village of Saranac Lake shall convey to the state thirty acres of certain true
forest land owned by such village on Roaring Brook in the northern half of Lot 113, Township 11, Richards
Survey. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the state may convey to the town of Arietta twenty-eight
acres of forest preserve land within such town for public use in providing for the extension of the runway and
landing strip of the Piseco airport and in exchange therefor the town of Arietta shall convey to the state thirty
acres of certain land owned by such town in the town of Arietta. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
and subject to legislative approval of the tracts to be exchanged prior to the actual transfer of title, the state, in
order to consolidate its land holdings for better management, may convey to International Paper Company
approximately eight thousand five hundred acres of forest preserve land located in townships two and three of
Totten and Crossfield's Purchase and township nine of the Moose River Tract, Hamilton county, and in
exchange therefore International Paper Company shall convey to the state for incorporation into the forest
preserve approximately the same number of acres of land located within such townships and such County on
condition that the legislature shall determine that the lands to be received by the state are at least equal in
value to the lands to be conveyed by the state. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions and subject to
legislative approval of the tracts to be exchanged prior to the actual transfer of title and the conditions herein
set forth, the state, in order to facilitate the preservation of historic buildings listed on the national register of
historic places by rejoining an historic grouping of buildings under unitary ownership and stewardship, may
convey to Sagamore Institute, Inc., a not-for-profit educational organization, approximately ten acres of land
and buildings thereon adjoining the real property of the Sagamore Institute, Inc. and located on Sagamore
Road, near Racquette Lake Village, in the Town of Long Lake, county of Hamilton, and in exchange therefor;
Sagamore Institute, Inc. shall convey to the state for incorporation into the forest preserve approximately two
hundred acres of wild forest land located within the Adirondack Park on condition that the legislature shall
determine that the lands to be received by the state are at least equal in value to the lands and buildings to be
conveyed by the state and that the natural and historic character of the lands and buildings conveyed by the
state will be secured by appropriate covenants and restrictions and that the lands and buildings conveyed by
the state will reasonably be available for public visits according to agreement between Sagamore Institute,
Inc. and the state.

Amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 222 011.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 6, section 11
11. a. The county court shall have jurisdiction over the following classes of actions and proceedings which
shall be originated in such county court in the manner provided by law, except that actions and proceedings
within the jurisdiction of the district court or a town, village or city court outside the city of New York may,
as provided by law, be originated therein: actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and
proceedings for the recovery of chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens
and liens on personal property where the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property does not
exceed twenty-five thousand dollars exclusive of interest and costs; over all crimes and other violations of
law; over summary proceedings to recover possession of real property, and to remove tenants therefrom; and
over such other actions and proceedings, not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the supreme court, as may be
provided by law.

b. The county court shall exercise such equity jurisdiction as may be provided by law and its jurisdiction to
enter judgment upon a counterclaim for the recovery of money only shall be unlimited.

c. The county court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine all appeals arising in the county in the
following actions and proceedings: as of right, from a judgment or order of the district court or a town,
village or city court which finally determines an action or proceeding and, as may be provided by law, from a
Judgement or order of any such court which does not finally determine an action or proceeding. The
legislature may provide, in accordance with the provisions of section eight of this article, that any or all of
such appeals be taken to an appellate term of the supreme court instead of the county court.

d. The provisions of this section shall in no way limit or impair the jurisdiction of the supreme court as set
forth in section seven of this article. 

Subdivision a amended November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 223 016.0 006.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 6, section 16
16. a. The district court of Nassau county may be continued under existing law and the legislature may, at the
request of the board of supervisors or other elective governing body of any county outside the city of New
York, establish the district court for the entire area of such county or for a portion of such county consisting
of one or more cities, or one or more towns which are contiguous, or of a combination of such cities and such
towns provided at least one of such cities is contiguous to one of such towns.

b. No law establishing the district court for an entire county shall become effective unless approved at a
general election on the question of the approval of such law by a majority of the votes cast thereon by the
electors within the area of any cities in the county considered as one unit and by a majority of the votes cast
thereon by the electors within the area outside of cities in the county considered as one unit.

c. No law establishing the district court for a portion of a county shall become effective unless approved at a
general election on the question of the approval of such law by a majority of the votes cast thereon by the
electors within the area of any cities included in such portion of the county considered as one unit and by a
majority of the votes cast thereon by the electors within the area outside of cities included in such portion of
the county considered as one unit.

d. The district court shall have such jurisdiction as may be provided by law, but not in any respect greater
than the jurisdiction of the courts for the city of New York as provided in section fifteen of this article,
provided, however, that in actions and proceedings for the recovery of money, actions and proceedings for the
recovery of chattels and actions and proceedings for the foreclosure of mechanics liens and liens on personal
property, the amount sought to be recovered or the value of the property shall not exceed fifteen thousand
dollars exclusive of interest and costs.

e. The legislature may create districts of the district court which shall consist of an entire county or of an area
less than a county.

f. There shall be at least one judge of the district court for each district and such number of additional judges
in each district as may be provided by law.

g. The judges of the district court shall be apportioned among the districts as may be provided by law, and to
the extent practicable, in accordance with the population and the volume of judicial business.

h. The judges shall be residents of the district and shall be chosen by the electors of the district. Their terms
shall be six years from and including the first day of January next after their election.

i. The legislature may regulate and discontinue the district court in any county or portion thereof. 

Subdivision d amended by vote of the people November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 224 006.0 016.0 0 NY 1938 1983 ***

Article 16, section 6
6. Notwithstanding any provision of this or any other article of this constitution to the contrary, the legislature
may by law authorize a county, city, town or village, or combination thereof acting together, to undertake the
development of public improvements or services, including the acquisition of land, for the purpose of
redevelopment of economically unproductive, blighted or deteriorated areas and, in furtherance thereof, to
contract indebtedness. Any such indebtedness shall be contracted by any such county, city, town or village, or
combination thereof acting together, without the pledge of its faith and credit, or the faith and credit of the
state, for the payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, and such indebtedness may be paid
without restriction as to the amount or relative amount of annual installments. The amount of any
indebtedness contracted under this section may be excluded in ascertaining the power of such county, city,
town or village to contract indebtedness within the provisions of this constitution relating thereto. Any
county, city, town or village contracting indebtedness pursuant to this section for redevelopment of an
economically unproductive, blighted or deteriorated area shall pledge to the payment thereof that portion of
the taxes raised by it on real estate in such area which, in any year, is attributed to the increase in value of
taxable real estate resulting from such redevelopment. The legislature may further authorize any county, city,
town or village, or combination thereof acting together, to carry out the powers and duties conferred by this
section by means of a public corporation created therefor. 

New. Added November 8, 1983.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 225 013.0 013.0 0 NY 1938 1984 ***

Article 13, section 13
13. (a) Except in counties in the city of New York and except as authorized in section one of article nine of
this constitution, registers in counties having registers shall be chosen by the electors of the respective
counties once in every three years and whenever the occurring of vacancies shall require; the sheriff and the
clerk of each county shall be chosen by the electors once in every three or four years as the legislature shall
direct. Sheriffs shall hold no other office. They may be required by law to renew their security, from time to
time; and in default of giving such new security, their offices shall be deemed vacant. But the county shall
never be made responsible for the acts of the sheriff. The governor may remove any elective sheriff, county
clerk, district attorney or register within the term for which he shall have been elected; but before so doing he
shall give to such officer a copy of the charges against him and an opportunity of being heard in his defense.
In each county a district attorney shall be chosen by the electors once in every three or four years as the
legislature shall direct. The clerk of each county in the city of New York shall be appointed, and be subject to
removal, by the appellate division of the supreme court in the judicial department in which the county is
located. In addition to his powers and duties as clerk of the supreme court, he shall have power to select,
draw, summon and empanel grand and petit jurors in the manner and under the conditions now or hereafter
prescribed by law, and shall have such other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by the city from time to
time by local law.
(b) Any district attorney who shall fail faithfully to prosecute a person charged with the violation in his
county of any provision of this article which may come to his knowledge, shall be removed from office by the
governor, after due notice and an opportunity of being heard in his defense. The expenses which shall be
incurred by any county, in investigating and prosecuting any charge of bribery or attempting to bribe any
person holding office under the laws of this state, within such county, or of receiving bribes by any such
person in said county, shall be a charge against the state, and their payment by the state shall be provided for
by law.
(c) The city of New York is hereby vested with power from time to time to abolish by local law, as defined by
the legislature, the office of any county officer within the city other than judges, clerks of counties and district
attorneys, and to assign any or all functions of such officers to city officers, courts or clerks of counties, and
to prescribe the powers, duties, qualifications, number, mode of selection and removal, terms of office and
compensation of the persons holding such offices and the employees therein, and to assign to city officers any
powers or duties of clerks of counties not assigned by this constitution. The legislature shall not pass any law
affecting any such matters in relation to such offices within the city of New York except on message from the
governor declaring that an emergency exists and the concurrent action of two-thirds of the members of each
house, except that existing laws regarding each such office shall continue in force, and may be amended or
repealed by the legislature as heretofore, until the power herein granted to the city has been exercised with
respect to that office. The provisions of article nine shall not prevent the legislature from passing general or
special laws prescribing or affecting, powers and duties of such city officers or such courts or clerks to whom
or which functions of such county officers shall have been so assigned, in so far as such powers or duties
embrace subjects not relating to property, affairs or government of such city. 

Subdivision (a) amended November 6, 1984.

*** MEND ***
*** MSTART 226 009.0 001.0 0 NY 1938 1984 ***

Article 1, section 9
9. 1. No law shall be passed abridging the rights of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition the
government, or any department thereof; nor shall any divorce be granted otherwise than by due judicial
proceedings; except as hereinafter provided, no lottery or the sale of lottery tickets, pool-selling, book-
making, or any other kind of gambling, except lotteries operated by the state and the sale of lottery tickets in
connection therewith as may be authorized and prescribed by the legislature, the net proceeds of which shall
be applied exclusively to or in aid or support of education in this state as the legislature may prescribe, and
except parimutuel betting on horse races as may be prescribed by the legislature and from which the state
shall derive a reasonable revenue for the support of government, shall hereafter be authorized or allowed
within this state; and the legislature shall pass appropriate laws to prevent offenses against any of the
provisions of this section.

2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any city, town or village within the state may by
an approving vote of the majority of the qualified electors in such municipality voting on a proposition
therefor submitted at a general or special election authorize, subject to state legislative supervision and
control, the conduct of one or both of the following categories of games of chance commonly known as: (a)
bingo or lotto, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card
conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random; (b) games in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
a winning number or numbers, color or colors, or symbol or symbols determined by chance from among
those previously selected or played, whether determined as the result of the spinning of a wheel, a drawing or
otherwise by chance. If authorized, such games shall be subject to the following restrictions, among others
which may be prescribed by the legislature: (1) only bona fide religious, charitable or non-profit organizations
of veterans, volunteer firemen and similar non-profit organizations shall be permitted to conduct such games;
(2) the entire net proceeds of any game shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of such
organizations; (3) no person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in the
management or operation of such game; and (4) no person shall receive any remuneration for participating in
the management or operation of any such game. Unless otherwise provided by law, no single prize shall
exceed two hundred fifty dollars, nor shall any series of prizes on one occasion aggregate more than one
thousand dollars. The legislature shall pass appropriate laws to effectuate the purposes of this subdivision,
ensure that such games are rigidly regulated to prevent commercialized gambling, prevent participation by
criminal and other undesirable elements and the diversion of funds from the purposes authorized hereunder
and establish a method by which a municipality which has authorized such games may rescind or revoke such
authorization. Unless permitted by the legislature, no municipality shall have the power to pass local laws or
ordinances relating to such games.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the legislature from passing laws
more restrictive than any of the provisions of this section. 

Amended  November 6, 1984.


*** MEND ***

*** CEND ***

